,Unnamed: 0,title,pub_date,pub_location,pub_name,length,word_count,countries,byline,headline,full_text,pub_type
50,50,Biggest daily rise in cases fuels fear of an epidemic in Britain,"March 5, 2020 Thursday",International,The Times (London),668,668,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Marc Horne ; Helen Puttick Chris Smyth ; Campbell Thomas,Biggest daily rise in cases fuels fear of an epidemic in Britain,"Britain recorded its biggest jump yet in coronavirus cases yesterday with clear signs the infection is spreading freely, increasing the risk of an epidemic.Nicola Sturgeon warned that ""many more"" people in Scotland would contract coronavirus after two new cases were confirmed in Grampian and Ayrshire, bringing the total north of the border to three. The other patient, who is being treated in Tayside, was said yesterday to work for Food Standards Scotland.The state-funded agency, based in Aberdeen, would neither confirm nor deny the claim but said: ""We respect every patient's right to confidentiality and would expect others to do [so].""There were 32 more patients confirmed in England, three times more than in previous days, plus two in Northern Ireland, taking the UK total to 87. All three coronavirus patients in Scotland are said to be clinically well and receiving care in hospital.Ms Sturgeon said yesterday that efforts were under way to identify and test those who had been in close contact with the two latest patients. Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, said the government was poised to accept that the virus could no longer be stamped out in Britain and it would switch from aiming to contain it to delaying its spread. A ban on handshakes is being considered.In efforts to ensure the public follow health advice, the Behavioural Insights Team, known as the ""nudge unit"", has been brought into the Downing Street ""war room"". It told ministers to suggest concrete steps that were achievable and give people a sense of control.On a visit to the NHS 24 Centre at the Golden Jubilee Hospital in Clydebank yesterday Ms Sturgeon said the public should be assured ""that health protection teams working on this have all the information they need to make sure that patients are given the appropriate care they need but also that contact tracing is done quickly and robustly and those processes are already under way"".While the Scottish government has forecast that as many as 80 per cent of Scots could become ill with the virus, the first minister said this was the very worst outcome. ""People right now are hearing big numbers, that are scary numbers and it is important we continue to put these in context. These are worst-case scenarios,"" she said.""Whatever the number of people who might end up getting coronavirus might be, the vast majority will have mild symptoms, it will be like a cold or a mild case of flu. It will be a smaller number who develop complications and need hospitalisation and that happens with seasonal flu every year.""NHS 24 has set up a phone line for people without symptoms of coronavirus to call to receive more information, with advice also available on the NHS Inform website. On Monday, the day after Scotland's first case was confirmed, the helpline received 538 calls, with a further 430 received on Tuesday. By the end of Tuesday there had been 264,118 visits to the coronavirus page on the NHS Inform website.Finance ministers from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are to press the UK government on what extra health funding will be allocated to deal with the outbreak.Kate Forbes, the Scottish finance secretary, said the issue was on the agenda for a meeting with Stephen Barclay, the chief secretary to the Treasury. ""I think it is really important that we are able to share information and have an ongoing dialogue in terms of funding,"" she said.Residents at a sheltered housing complex in Onthank, Kilmarnock, East Ayrshire, were advised to stay in their homes overnight on Tuesday as a tenant who had returned from southeast Asia was tested. They were told yesterday they could ""carry on as normal"". Scotland's chief medical officer said that there was ""no scientific reason"" to cancel the country's Six Nations game with France at Murrayfield on Sunday.Professor Whitty told BBC Radio 4's Today yesterday: ""At this point we think it is likely, not definite, that we will move into onward transmission and an epidemic here in the UK.""",Newspaper
132,132,Change tack or lose public support',"March 16, 2020 Monday",International,The Times (London),392,392,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Greg Hurst,Change tack or lose public support',"Ministers risk losing public co-operation for drastic measures to combat the virus unless their approach changes, a leading behavioural scientist has said.Susan Michie, professor of health psychology at University College London, said Matt Hancock, the health secretary, should stop making announcements and the government's two most prominent advisers must show they have learnt from setbacks.Public anxiety had been heightened by Britain seeming to take weaker measures than other countries and by confusion over herd immunity, she said. ""When people feel that there appears to be some inconsistency or when don't fully understand the rationale for the policies, then that causes anxiety.""Professor Michie is a member of a be-havioural science group that offers advice to the government's scientific advisers on emergencies, but spoke to The Times in a personal capacity.She said it was unhelpful of Mr Hancock to have written a newspaper article and given interviews yesterday on forthcoming measures to tackle the virus without the chief scientific and medical advisers, Sir Patrick Vallance and Chris Whitty.""If different things are coming from different people at different times it is very unsettling for people,"" she said. ""The chief scientist and chief medical officer are trusted sources, and it is important that they are the ones delivering these messages, otherwise there is going to be a lot of consternation.""But Sir Patrick and Professor Whitty should, she said, have published supporting evidence at their press conference on Thursday when they said they would not close schools in England or introduce social distancing policies.It was a mistake, too, for Sir Patrick to have spoken of herd immunity - a difficult concept, she said.""If you lose trust it is difficult to build up again but I don't think Chris and Patrick have lost trust irretrievably. I just think it is something that really needs to be looked at,"" Professor Michie said.""When it is a fast-moving situation there will always be things that don't go smoothly. The key thing is that people show that they are listening and they have learnt the lessons.""If I were in their shoes I would do daily or every other day bulletins.""More must also be done, she said, to acknowledge that self-isolation is more difficult for certain groups of people, such as those in poor housing.",Newspaper
135,135,PM tries to regain grip as death toll rises to 35,"March 16, 2020 Monday",International,The Times (London),750,750,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Lucy Fisher,PM tries to regain grip as death toll rises to 35,"Boris Johnson will attempt to wrest back control of the coronavirus crisis today after No 10 was stung by criticism of its performance and the death toll rose to 35.Matt Hancock, the health secretary, admitted yesterday that Britain had insufficient ventilators to cope with the number of people being admitted to hospital. He said that carmakers and defence contractors would be asked to switch production to make medical equipment to aid respiration, which can be harmed by Covid-19.The prime minister will put manufacturers, including Unipart Group, on a war footing this morning, urging them to support production of ventilators as a ""national priority"" and as part of a UK-wide effort to tackle the pandemic. He will also begin holding daily press conferences to clarify government policy.The developments come as: ? All people aged above 70 will be advised within weeks to remain at home for up to four months.? The government is not ruling out the closure of restaurants, bars and nonessential shops to curb the outbreak, a policy pursued by other nations. ? Hotels could be turned into makeshift hospitals with elective operations cancelled to free NHS capacity, allowing operating theatres normally used for hip and knee replacements to be converted into wards.? Mr Hancock has insisted that the government is not pursuing a policy of allowing the virus to spread in order to achieve ""herd immunity"", apparently contradicting a statement last week by Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser.? The government is drawing up contingency plans for taxpayer-funded repatriation flights to rescue Britons stranded overseas by the pandemic. ? Britons are urged to ""act responsibly"" and purchase only the food and lavatory roll they need, as panic-buying has left supermarket shelves empty.In documents seen by The Guardian last night, Public Health England said that the emergency could last until next Continued on page 4, col 3 call with G7 leaders to discuss international efforts and will urge them to provide funding for vaccine research.The Queen, who spent the weekend at Windsor Castle, is expected to return to London this week but will change her schedule of commitments.The Department for Transport is understood to be considering chartering aircraft to return holidaymakers and British workers from countries that have closed their borders. Commercial airlines are cancelling flights to countries such as Italy, Spain, Poland, the Czech Republic and Denmark.A spokesman for the ministry said: ""The UK government has met extensively with the aviation sector's leadership and continues to provide support measures such as influencing the European Commission to relax flight slots.""In Britain the death toll rose to 35 yesterday. NHS England said that the patients who had died, in hospitals across the country, were aged between 59 and 94 and had underlying health conditions.A Downing Street spokeswoman said: ""The prime minister and this government are committed to keeping the public informed every step of the way about what we're doing to fight the spread of coronavirus, when we're doing it and why we're doing it.""Coronavirus, pages 6-13 Clare Foges, page 25 Leading article, page 29 Airlines seek bailout, page 35 continued from page 1 Johnson to give daily briefings spring, with up to eight million people needing hospital treatment. Four in every five people are expected to contract the virus.A leading behavioural scientist and government adviser warned yesterday that ministers risked losing public cooperation for drastic measures to combat the coronavirus unless they changed their approach.Susan Michie, professor of health psychology at University College London, said that public anxiety had been heightened by Britain seeming to take weaker measures than other countries and by confusion over herd immunity.She said that Mr Hancock should stop making announcements and the government's two most prominent advisers must show that they had learnt from a series of setbacks.This afternoon the prime minister will chair another meeting of the Cobra emergency committee, in which modelling of the outbreak will be discussed, along with plans to shield elderly and vulnerable people.Decisions on whether to move from advising individual isolation to household isolation are set to be made, as well as a decision on whether to ban mass gatherings. In Scotland events involving more than 500 people are to be cancelled from this week.Mr Johnson will also take part in a",Newspaper
136,136,PM tries to regain grip as death toll rises to 35,"March 16, 2020 Monday",International,The Times (London),753,753,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Lucy Fisher ; Kat Lay ; Greg Hurst Chris Smyth,PM tries to regain grip as death toll rises to 35,"Boris Johnson will attempt to wrest back control of the coronavirus crisis today after No 10 was stung by criticism of its performance and the death toll rose to 35.Matt Hancock, the health secretary, admitted yesterday that Britain had insufficient ventilators to cope with the number of people being admitted to hospital. He said that carmakers and defence contractors would be asked to switch production to make medical equipment to aid respiration, which can be harmed by Covid-19.The prime minister will put manufacturers, including Unipart Group, on a war-footing this morning, urging them to support production of ventilators as a ""national priority"" and as part of a UK-wide effort to tackle the pandemic. He will also begin holding daily press conferences to clarify government policy.The developments come as: ? All people aged above 70 will be advised within weeks to remain at home for up to four months.? The government is not ruling out the closure of restaurants, bars and other shops to curb the outbreak, a policy pursued by other nations.? Hotels could be turned into makeshift hospitals with elective operations cancelled to free NHS capacity, allowing operating theatres normally used for hip and knee replacements to be converted into wards.? Mr Hancock has insisted that the government is not pursuing a policy of allowing the virus to spread in order to achieve ""herd immunity"", apparently contradicting a statement last week by Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific officer.? The government is drawing up contingency plans for taxpayer-funded repatriation flights to rescue Britons stranded overseas by the pandemic. ? Britons are urged to ""act responsibly"" and purchase only the food and lavatory roll they need, as panic-buying has left supermarket shelves empty.In documents seen by The Guardian last night, Public Health England said that the emergency could last until next Continued on page 2, col 3 call with G7 leaders to discuss international efforts and will urge them to provide funding for vaccine research.The Queen, who spent the weekend at Windsor Castle, is expected to return to London this week but will change her schedule of commitments.The Department for Transport is understood to be considering chartering aircraft to return holidaymakers and British workers from countries that have closed their borders. Commercial airlines are cancelling flights to countries such as Italy, Spain, Poland, the Czech Republic and Denmark.A spokesman for the ministry said: ""The UK government has met extensively with the aviation sector's leadership and continues to provide support measures such as influencing the European Commission to relax flight slots.""In Britain the death toll rose to 35 yesterday, its highest increase to date. NHS England said that the patients who had died, in hospitals across the country, were aged between 59 and 94 and had underlying health conditions.A Downing Street spokeswoman said: ""The prime minister and this government are committed to keeping the public informed every step of the way about what we're doing to fight the spread of coronavirus, when we're doing it and why we're doing it.""Coronavirus, pages 4-11 Clare Foges, page 23 Leading article, page 27 Airlines seek bailout, page 33 continued from page 1 Johnson to give daily briefings spring, with up to eight million people needing hospital treatment. Four in every five people ""are expected"" to contract the virus.A leading behavioural scientist and government adviser warned yesterday that ministers risked losing public cooperation for drastic measures to combat the coronavirus unless they changed their approach.Susan Michie, professor of health psychology at University College London, said public anxiety had been heightened by Britain seeming to take weaker measures than other countries and by confusion over herd immunity.She said that Mr Hancock should stop making announcements and the government's two most prominent advisers must show that they had learnt from a series of setbacks.This afternoon the prime minister will chair another meeting of the Cobra emergency committee, in which modelling of the outbreak will be discussed, along with plans to shield elderly and vulnerable people.Decisions on whether to move from advising individual isolation to household isolation are set to be made, as well as a decision on whether to ban mass gatherings. In Scotland, events for more than 500 people are to be cancelled from this week.Mr Johnson will also take part in a",Newspaper
137,137,PM tries to regain grip as death toll rises to 35,"March 16, 2020 Monday",International,The Times (London),766,766,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Lucy Fisher,PM tries to regain grip as death toll rises to 35,"Boris Johnson will attempt to wrest back control of the accelerating coronavirus crisis with daily press conferences after No 10 was stung by criticism at the weekend over its handling of the situation.Matt Hancock, the Westminster health secretary, admitted yesterday that the UK has insufficient ventilators, ""the thing the NHS needs now more than anything else"", to cope with the growing numbers of people being admitted to hospital.Jeane Freeman, Mr Hancock's counterpart in Scotland, criticised his comments on plans to isolate the over-70s for up to four months. The policy will not be enforced in Scotland and the Scottish health secretary slated the way the UK strategy had been publicised, saying: ""It's not how we would do it. Governments should be coming and explaining these things really clearly.""Hours later it was confirmed that a care home in Lanarkshire had six cases of Covid-19. Residents at Highgate care home near Uddingston are being closely monitored and strict infection control measures have been put in place.The centre is home to about 70 elderly patients, some of whom have conditions such as Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease.As concerns rise about the lack of vital healthcare equipment, carmakers and defence contractors will be asked to switch production to make medical respirators to help those whose breathing becomes impaired by the virus.The prime minister will put manufacturers including Unipart Group on a war footing this morning, urging them to support production of ventilators as a ""national priority"" and as part of a UK-wide effort to tackle the pandemic.The developments come as: ? The coronavirus death toll in the UK rose yesterday to 35 after 14 people died in 24 hours, a record jump in the number of fatalities.? Figures from the Scottish government showed that 153 people have tested positive, a rise of 32 since Saturday. ? The head of Scotland's largest Continued on page 4, column 3 will chair another meeting of the Cobra committee, in which modelling of the outbreak will be discussed along with plans to shield vulnerable people.Decisions on whether to move from advising individual isolation to household isolation will be made, as well as on whether to ban mass gatherings. In Scotland, events for more than 500 people have been cancelled.Mr Johnson will also take part in a call with G7 leaders to discuss international efforts, and will urge them to provide funding and expertise for research towards a vaccine.As concerns grow over ventilators health officials are also working urgently to find the quickest way to train new ventilator operators, it is understood, as the equipment is dangerous when used incorrectly.Yesterday brought the biggest increase in the UK death toll to date. NHS England said the patients who died, in hospitals across the country, were aged between 59 and 94 and all had underlying health conditions.Positive test results stood at 1,372 at 9am on Sunday, up from 1,140 the day before. However, Public Health England no longer advises tests for people with mild symptoms in the community, regardless of their travel history, and the true number of infections is likely to be far higher.Coronavirus, pages 6-13 Clare Foges, page 25 Leading article, page 29 Airlines seek bailout, page 35 continued from page 1 Johnson to give daily briefings teaching union has said he expects the country's 2,500 schools to close within weeks.? The closure of restaurants, bars and other shops is being considered, a policy pursued by other nations. ? Hotels could be turned into makeshift hospitals and elective operations cancelled to free up NHS capacity. ? Shoppers were urged to ""act responsibly"" as panic-buying left supermarket shelves empty.In documents seen by The Guardian Public Health England said the crisis could last until next Spring, with up to 8 million people needing hospital treatment. Four in every five people ""are expected"" to contract the virus.Yesterday a leading behavioural scientist and government adviser warned that ministers risk losing public co-operation for drastic measures to combat the virus unless they change approach.Susan Michie, professor of health psychology at University College London, said anxiety had been raised by Britain having appeared to take weaker measures than other countries and by confusion over herd immunity.The government also came in for criticism from Dr Chaand Nagpaul, chairman of the British Medical Association, who said the UK's lack of ventilators compared to other countries is ""a result of a decade of under-funding"".This afternoon the prime minister",Newspaper
148,148,Coronavirus strategy tests UK's reputation for science,"March 17, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",650,650,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Anjana Ahuja,Coronavirus strategy tests UK's reputation for science,"T he Chinese practice of variolation must have made little sense to 18th-century Englanders. It involved giving children small scratches and then rubbing the broken skin with powder ground from smallpox scabs.The resulting mild infection protected most children against the fullblown disease (though it killed some too). Variolation - so named because smallpox is spread by the variola virus - was the first step towards the safer practice of vaccination.The fact that a theory is counter-intuitive does not necessarily mean it is wrong. It does, however, demand that those championing it explain carefully why they think it is better than the common sense alternative. The UK government, having initially adopted a more laissez-faire management style to coronavirus than other European countries, has found itself in a bind - although more draconian measures are being announced on an almost hourly basis.Britain's European neighbours, already approaching the eye of the Covid-19 storm, had been looking on in horror. The World Health Organization urged countries not to abandon containment, testing and contact tracing. The diligent application of that advice has worked in Singapore and Hong Kong.The British government has accepted that community transmission is inevitable. Testing for Covid-19 will happen in hospital, meaning that only the most severe infections will be included in official case numbers. Ministers must be unsparingly transparent about the science behind its reasoning.The role of government, as it faces down this unpredictable threat, is not only to protect life but also to keep society functioning as far as possible. That means using the best science available to inform political decisions. Fortunately, world-class expertise in epidemiology, virology, immunology and mathematical modelling can be found in British universities.That knowledge makes its way to ministers via the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. It must then be synthesised into a political judgment: how to minimise harm while maintaining, as far as possible, the economy and public confidence. Even in a pandemic - perhaps especially so then - some semblance of life must continue. Food supply chains must function; hospitals and care facilities need to operate at full steam. In order to keep hospitals staffed, schools need to stay open if feasible. In any case, schools act as informal quarantines - and provide a psychologically comforting routine. The instinct to shut society down, as China did with Wuhan, is not cost-free when it comes to public health. Maxwell Smith, an ethicist at Western University in Ontario, points out that compulsory quarantine, school closures and a disrupted economy inflict social damage that can affect health further down the line. ""China will feel the effects [of a shutdown] for years,"" he said. ""There were millions of people not in the workforce and not in school. That can change people's socio-economic status."" A 2017 analysis suggested low socio-economic status is correlated with early death.The behavioural science aspect to the UK coronavirus response, though, looks shakier. When ministers decreed last week that life should carry on as normal, many people did the opposite. The loss of public trust, epitomised by supermarket shelves stripped bare, is concerning if the national strategy hinges on public compliance.Those pushing a vision of Global Britain have long wagered that the country's exceptional reputation in science and technology will unlock a glittering economic and political future. That belief underpins the Budget announcement of an £800m research agency, specialising in high-risk, high-reward ideas. The UK's distinctive national response to Covid-19 will test that theory of scientific exceptionalism to destruction.anjana.ahuja@ft.comThe instinct to shut down, as China did with Wuhan, is not cost-free to public health",Newspaper
149,149,Coronavirus strategy tests UK's reputation for science,"March 17, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",650,650,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Anjana Ahuja,Coronavirus strategy tests UK's reputation for science,"T he Chinese practice of variolation must have made little sense to 18th-century Englanders. It involved giving children small scratches and then rubbing the broken skin with powder ground from smallpox scabs.The resulting mild infection protected most children against the fullblown disease (though it killed some too). Variolation - so named because smallpox is spread by the variola virus - was the first step towards the safer practice of vaccination.The fact that a theory is counter-intuitive does not necessarily mean it is wrong. It does, however, demand that those championing it explain carefully why they think it is better than the common sense alternative. The UK government, having initially adopted a more laissez-faire management style to coronavirus than other European countries, has found itself in a bind - although more draconian measures are being announced on an almost hourly basis.Britain's European neighbours, already approaching the eye of the Covid-19 storm, had been looking on in horror. The World Health Organization urged countries not to abandon containment, testing and contact tracing. The diligent application of that advice has worked in Singapore and Hong Kong.The British government has accepted that community transmission is inevitable. Testing for Covid-19 will happen in hospital, meaning that only the most severe infections will be included in official case numbers. Ministers must be unsparingly transparent about the science behind its reasoning.The role of government, as it faces down this unpredictable threat, is not only to protect life but also to keep society functioning as far as possible. That means using the best science available to inform political decisions. Fortunately, world-class expertise in epidemiology, virology, immunology and mathematical modelling can be found in British universities.That knowledge makes its way to ministers via the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. It must then be synthesised into a political judgment: how to minimise harm while maintaining, as far as possible, the economy and public confidence. Even in a pandemic - perhaps especially so then - some semblance of life must continue. Food supply chains must function; hospitals and care facilities need to operate at full steam. In order to keep hospitals staffed, schools need to stay open if feasible. In any case, schools act as informal quarantines - and provide a psychologically comforting routine. The instinct to shut society down, as China did with Wuhan, is not cost-free when it comes to public health. Maxwell Smith, an ethicist at Western University in Ontario, points out that compulsory quarantine, school closures and a disrupted economy inflict social damage that can affect health further down the line. ""China will feel the effects [of a shutdown] for years,"" he said. ""There were millions of people not in the workforce and not in school. That can change people's socio-economic status."" A 2017 analysis suggested low socio-economic status is correlated with early death.The behavioural science aspect to the UK coronavirus response, though, looks shakier. When ministers decreed last week that life should carry on as normal, many people did the opposite. The loss of public trust, epitomised by supermarket shelves stripped bare, is concerning if the national strategy hinges on public compliance.Those pushing a vision of Global Britain have long wagered that the country's exceptional reputation in science and technology will unlock a glittering economic and political future. That belief underpins the Budget announcement of an £800m research agency, specialising in high-risk, high-reward ideas. The UK's distinctive national response to Covid-19 will test that theory of scientific exceptionalism to destruction.anjana.ahuja@ft.comThe instinct to shut down, as China did with Wuhan, is not cost-free to public health",Newspaper
150,150,Coronavirus strategy tests UK's reputation for science,"March 17, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",650,650,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Anjana Ahuja,Coronavirus strategy tests UK's reputation for science,"T he Chinese practice of variolation must have made little sense to 18th-century Englanders. It involved giving children small scratches and then rubbing the broken skin with powder ground from smallpox scabs.The resulting mild infection protected most children against the fullblown disease (though it killed some too). Variolation - so named because smallpox is spread by the variola virus - was the first step towards the safer practice of vaccination.The fact that a theory is counter-intuitive does not necessarily mean it is wrong. It does, however, demand that those championing it explain carefully why they think it is better than the common sense alternative. The UK government, having initially adopted a more laissez-faire management style to coronavirus than other European countries, has found itself in a bind - although more draconian measures are being announced on an almost hourly basis.Britain's European neighbours, already approaching the eye of the Covid-19 storm, had been looking on in horror. The World Health Organization urged countries not to abandon containment, testing and contact tracing. The diligent application of that advice has worked in Singapore and Hong Kong.The British government has accepted that community transmission is inevitable. Testing for Covid-19 will happen in hospital, meaning that only the most severe infections will be included in official case numbers. Ministers must be unsparingly transparent about the science behind its reasoning.The role of government, as it faces down this unpredictable threat, is not only to protect life but also to keep society functioning as far as possible. That means using the best science available to inform political decisions. Fortunately, world-class expertise in epidemiology, virology, immunology and mathematical modelling can be found in British universities.That knowledge makes its way to ministers via the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. It must then be synthesised into a political judgment: how to minimise harm while maintaining, as far as possible, the economy and public confidence. Even in a pandemic - perhaps especially so then - some semblance of life must continue. Food supply chains must function; hospitals and care facilities need to operate at full steam. In order to keep hospitals staffed, schools need to stay open if feasible. In any case, schools act as informal quarantines - and provide a psychologically comforting routine. The instinct to shut society down, as China did with Wuhan, is not cost-free when it comes to public health. Maxwell Smith, an ethicist at Western University in Ontario, points out that compulsory quarantine, school closures and a disrupted economy inflict social damage that can affect health further down the line. ""China will feel the effects [of a shutdown] for years,"" he said. ""There were millions of people not in the workforce and not in school. That can change people's socio-economic status."" A 2017 analysis suggested low socio-economic status is correlated with early death.The behavioural science aspect to the UK coronavirus response, though, looks shakier. When ministers decreed last week that life should carry on as normal, many people did the opposite. The loss of public trust, epitomised by supermarket shelves stripped bare, is concerning if the national strategy hinges on public compliance.Those pushing a vision of Global Britain have long wagered that the country's exceptional reputation in science and technology will unlock a glittering economic and political future. That belief underpins the Budget announcement of an £800m research agency, specialising in high-risk, high-reward ideas. The UK's distinctive national response to Covid-19 will test that theory of scientific exceptionalism to destruction.anjana.ahuja@ft.comThe instinct to shut down, as China did with Wuhan, is not cost-free to public health",Newspaper
153,153,High-risk pub trips and scouring the shops for pasta - the little things are about to make a big difference,"March 17, 2020 Tuesday",International,The Evening Standard (London),565,565,England & Wales,Susannah Butter,High-risk pub trips and scouring the shops for pasta - the little things are about to make a big difference,"NEVER have I deliberated so much about whether to go to the pub. ""I'm still on for 7pm, I hope you have coronavirus because I want herd immunity,"" messaged my friend on Saturday. It didn't sound like the most enticing offer. I shared my mental micro-calculations about the risk with my boyfriend - which he countered by saying the pubs are still open, I'd been saying I wanted a pint and if we washed our hands and didn't touch our faces we'd be fine (we've been having an extended heated discussion/argument about what is and isn't paranoid regularly since the virus broke out and it usually ends with one of us going off in a huff, which bodes badly if we have to self-isolate together, or cocoon as it's been rebranded).What I'm finding difficult is a combination of a lack of control and uncertainty. I don't want to ""keep calm and carry on"", I've always hated that phrase. I understand nudge theory and the hazards of a nanny state but at the same time I would like boundaries; someone to tell me whether doing a trivial thing such as going to a yoga class will turn me into a super-spreader. Despite having a crush on Chief Medical Officer Chris Whitty, I don't understand how infection spreads and that means everything feels fraught with potential danger. I was relieved when the Government finally recommended we avoid offices, pubs and travelling. Although pubs are still allowed to open, which makes their insurance claims for loss of business more difficult. ""It's open but you shouldn't go"" is a confusing message.On Saturday, though, I did go. I thought if I was taking my life in my hands at the pub, I'd at least be guaranteed to get a table, but there was no chance of that. Everyone was either in the loo roll aisle of the supermarket or at the pub. And they were all talking about one thing. Coronavirus has infected all conversations in a way that even Brexit didn't.""This could be our last drink together for a while so let's have a last hurrah,"" was one strain of chat, along with: ""At least in the war they could meet up with other people, let's cross off the days of isolation and we will look back on this as an odd time we lived through"", ""A doctor mate says..."" and ""Is it paranoid to [insert latest concern]?"" As these conversations continue there are moments of panic where no one knows what to say, then someone will lighten the mood by asking what they should put in the background for their video calls when working from home or show that video of Arnold Schwarzenegger, age 72, in a Terminator T-shirt self-isolating his miniature horse Whiskey and pet donkey Lulu.The pub briefly provided a semblance of normality but the virus was lurking, literally, on a sign saying ""sport has been cancelled so this pub will be showing Coronation Street"". Not quite as exciting as the cup www.final.No wonder we are all obsessing over scouring the shops for the last tin of beans; it feels like the only action we can take. After some light stockpiling tourism I can report that corner shops have loo roll and if you like less popular pastas you will not go hungry - buckwheat fusilli is in rich supply because pasta snobbery is strong even in a pandemic. What is more painful is that the formerly trivial has become serious and we don't know how long this will last.There are moments where no one knows what to say then someone brings up the Arnie Schwarzenegger video",Newspaper
161,161,Top adviser says colleagues at odds over way forward;News Coronavirus,"March 18, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),840,840,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Top adviser says colleagues at odds over way forwardNews Coronavirus,"Expert advisers to ministers have disagreed about the right answers to coronavirus, the government's top scientist said yesterday as he warned that more draconian measures may need to be imposed quickly.Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, gave evidence to the Commons health select committee and said that Covid-19 was ""a first in not just a generation but potentially the first for 100 years"".20,000 deaths would be a ""good outcome"" Sir Patrick agreed with Jeremy Hunt, the chairman of the committee, that assuming there were 1,000 cases for each known death from coronavirus suggested an estimated 67,000 cases in Britain.After modelling from Imperial College London suggested that a quarter of a million people would die without drastic restrictions on work and social life that were imposed yesterday, Sir Patrick compared the figures to the 8,000 who die of flu annually.""If we can get numbers down to 20,000 and below, that's a good outcome in terms of where we would hope to get to with this outbreak. But that's still horrible, it's still an enormous number of deaths and an enormous pressure on the health service,"" he www.said.no sunday lunch with the grandchildren As a nation gets to grips with advice to limit socialising, Sir Patrick was asked if it was acceptable for older people to have lunch with their grandchildren and gave an emphatic ""no"".Social distancing had to be maintained until it was clear that cases were coming in no faster than the NHS could treat them, Sir Patrick said. ""When we are happy that can really be maintained properly, that is the time to start talking about how you might release it,"" he said.cases will come back when restrictions are eased Sir Patrick said that in the long term ""vaccines are the answer to this"", but would not be available for about a year, during which time it was not clear that restrictions could be eased successfully.""I don't know how long these measures are going to be needed for. It is certainly not a couple of weeks. It is going to be months,"" he said.""What happens when you release the measures is one of the big unknowns"".Despite saying that he did not want to be a ""merchant of doom"", he told the committee: ""All of the evidence from previous epidemics would suggest you can't avoid this bubbling back up again when you lift off.""Easing restrictions is likely to be a process of ""backing off a bit, seeing what happens, putting things back,"" he said. China is beginning to lift restrictions on daily life after bringing its outbreak under control but Sir Patrick said he would expect to see cases rising there again. ""I hope they're right and it doesn't. I'm very happy if I'm wrong and it doesn't come back,"" he www.said.no ""cosy consensus"" on best way forward Sir Patrick said he was ""absolutely"" seeking out dissenting opinions to inform the work of the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies (Sage), which he chairs. ""If you think Sage and the way Sage works is a cosy consensus of agreeing scientists you would be very mistaken. It is a lively and robust discussion with multiple inputs,"" he said.""We don't try to get everybody saying exactly the same thing, the idea is to look at the evidence and come up with the answers as best we can.""Ministers had listened to his advice without considering the cost to the economy, he emphasised. ""The advice that we've given from Sage which is based on modelling virology, clinical behavioural science ... has been really carefully listened to and hasn't been in any way from our perspective overlain with economic considerations as a reason to change the advice.""intensive care demand and rising cases led to change in advice Boris Johnson was criticised for the abrupt way in which socialising was banned, but Sir Patrick told the public to get used to rapid rethinks.""As you see things changing you might need to do more, you might need to do less, and that might happen quickly just as it did over the course of the last week. That isn't because there's a sudden change of strategy it is because you are responding to the information you've got,"" he said.Modelling of the outbreak changed over the weekend, as emerging data on cases suggested Britain was much closer to seeing exponential take-off than believed. It also became clear that more intensive care beds would be needed because oxygen alone wasn't working for patients in Italy, China and Britain.Neil Ferguson of Imperial College, who carried out the modelling for the government, said restrictions had been imposed just in time. ""We have got the timing about right.We're about three weeks or so behind Italy, two weeks behind France and Spain, so we are making these decisions in a more timely manner than other European countries,"" he told the BBC.Mr Hunt pointed out that half of Dutch patients in intensive care for coronavirus were under 50. The figures come from a study of 96 patients and it is unclear why so many younger people needed treatment when global figures show the over-70s are much more likely to need hospitalisation.",Newspaper
162,162,Top adviser says colleagues at odds over way forward;News Coronavirus,"March 18, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),838,838,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Top adviser says colleagues at odds over way forwardNews Coronavirus,"Expert advisers to ministers have disagreed about the right answers to coronavirus, the government's top scientist said yesterday as he warned that more draconian measures might need to be imposed quickly.Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, gave evidence to the Commons health select committee and said Covid-19 was ""a first in not just a generation but potentially the first for 100 years"".20,000 deaths would be a ""good outcome"" Sir Patrick agreed with Jeremy Hunt, the chairman of the committee, that assuming there were 1,000 cases for each known death from coronavirus it suggested an estimated 67,000 cases in Britain.After modelling from Imperial College London suggested a quarter of a million people would die without drastic restrictions on work and social life that were imposed yesterday, Sir Patrick compared the figures to the 8,000 who die of flu annually.""If we can get numbers down to 20,000 and below, that's a good outcome in terms of where we would hope to get to with this outbreak. But that's still horrible, it's still an enormous number of deaths and an enormous pressure on the health service,"" he www.said.no sunday lunch with the grandchildren As a nation gets to grips with advice to limit socialising, Sir Patrick was asked if it was acceptable for older people to have lunch with their grandchildren and gave an emphatic ""no"".Social distancing had to be maintained until it was clear cases were coming no faster than the NHS could treat them, Sir Patrick said. ""When we are happy that can really be maintained properly, that is the time to start talking about how you might release it,"" he said.cases will come back when restrictions are eased Sir Patrick said that in the long term ""vaccines are the answer to this"", but would not be available for about a year during which time it was not clear that restrictions could be eased successfully.""I don't know how long these measures are going to be needed for. It is certainly not a couple of weeks. It is going to be months,"" he said.""What happens when you release the measures is one of the big unknowns"".Despite saying he did not want to be a ""merchant of doom"", he told the committee: ""All of the evidence from previous epidemics would suggest you can't avoid this bubbling back up again when you lift off.""Easing restrictions is likely to be a process of ""backing off a bit, seeing what happens, putting things back,"" he said. China is beginning to lift restrictions on daily life after bringing its outbreak under control but Sir Patrick said he would expect to see cases rising there again. ""I hope they're right and it doesn't. I'm very happy if I'm wrong and that it doesn't come back,"" he www.said.no ""cosy consensus"" on best way forward Sir Patrick said he was ""absolutely"" seeking out dissenting opinions to inform the work of the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies (Sage), which he chairs. ""If you think Sage and the way Sage works is a cosy consensus of agreeing scientists you would be very mistaken. It is a lively and robust discussion with multiple inputs,"" he said.""We don't try to get everybody saying exactly the same thing, the idea is to look at the evidence and come up with the answers as best we can.Ministers had listened to his advice without considering the cost to the economy, he emphasised. ""The advice that we've given from Sage which is based on modelling virology, clinical behavioural science ... has been really carefully listened to and hasn't been in any way from our perspective overlain with economic considerations as a reason to change the advice.""intensive care demand and rising cases led to change in advice.Boris Johnson was criticised for the abrupt way in which socialising was banned, but Sir Patrick told the public to get used to rapid rethinks.""As you see things changing you might need to do more, you might need to do less, and that might happen quickly just as it did over the course of the last week. That isn't because there's a sudden change of strategy it is because you are responding to the information you've got,"" he said.Modelling of the outbreak changed over the weekend, as emerging data on cases suggested Britain was much closer to seeing exponential take off than believed. It also became clear that more intensive care beds would be needed because oxygen alone wasn't working for patients in Italy, China and Britain.Neil Ferguson of Imperial College, who carried out the modelling for the government, said restrictions had been imposed just in time. ""We have got the timing about right.We're about three weeks or so behind Italy, two weeks behind France and Spain, so we are making these decisions in a more timely manner than other European countries,"" he told the BBC.Mr Hunt pointed out that half of Dutch patients in intensive care for coronavirus were under 50. The figures come from a study of 96 patients and it is unclear why so many younger people needed treatment when global figures show the over-70s are much more likely to need hospitalisation.",Newspaper
163,163,Top adviser says colleagues at odds over way forward;News Coronavirus,"March 18, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),838,838,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Top adviser says colleagues at odds over way forwardNews Coronavirus,"Expert advisers to ministers have disagreed about the right answers to coronavirus, the government's top scientist said yesterday as he warned that more draconian measures might need to be imposed quickly.Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, gave evidence to the Commons health select committee and said Covid-19 was ""a first in not just a generation but potentially the first for 100 years"".20,000 deaths would be a ""good outcome"" Sir Patrick agreed with Jeremy Hunt, the chairman of the committee, that assuming there were 1,000 cases for each known death from coronavirus it suggested an estimated 67,000 cases in Britain.After modelling from Imperial College London suggested a quarter of a million people would die without drastic restrictions on work and social life that were imposed yesterday, Sir Patrick compared the figures to the 8,000 who die of flu annually.""If we can get numbers down to 20,000 and below, that's a good outcome in terms of where we would hope to get to with this outbreak. But that's still horrible, it's still an enormous number of deaths and an enormous pressure on the health service,"" he www.said.no sunday lunch with the grandchildren As a nation gets to grips with advice to limit socialising, Sir Patrick was asked if it was acceptable for older people to have lunch with their grandchildren and gave an emphatic ""no"".Social distancing had to be maintained until it was clear cases were coming no faster than the NHS could treat them, Sir Patrick said. ""When we are happy that can really be maintained properly, that is the time to start talking about how you might release it,"" he said.cases will come back when restrictions are eased Sir Patrick said that in the long term ""vaccines are the answer to this"", but would not be available for about a year during which time it was not clear that restrictions could be eased successfully.""I don't know how long these measures are going to be needed for. It is certainly not a couple of weeks. It is going to be months,"" he said.""What happens when you release the measures is one of the big unknowns"".Despite saying he did not want to be a ""merchant of doom"", he told the committee: ""All of the evidence from previous epidemics would suggest you can't avoid this bubbling back up again when you lift off.""Easing restrictions is likely to be a process of ""backing off a bit, seeing what happens, putting things back,"" he said. China is beginning to lift restrictions on daily life after bringing its outbreak under control but Sir Patrick said he would expect to see cases rising there again. ""I hope they're right and it doesn't. I'm very happy if I'm wrong and that it doesn't come back,"" he www.said.no ""cosy consensus"" on best way forward Sir Patrick said he was ""absolutely"" seeking out dissenting opinions to inform the work of the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies (Sage), which he chairs. ""If you think Sage and the way Sage works is a cosy consensus of agreeing scientists you would be very mistaken. It is a lively and robust discussion with multiple inputs,"" he said.""We don't try to get everybody saying exactly the same thing, the idea is to look at the evidence and come up with the answers as best we can.Ministers had listened to his advice without considering the cost to the economy, he emphasised. ""The advice that we've given from Sage which is based on modelling virology, clinical behavioural science ... has been really carefully listened to and hasn't been in any way from our perspective overlain with economic considerations as a reason to change the advice.""intensive care demand and rising cases led to change in advice.Boris Johnson was criticised for the abrupt way in which socialising was banned, but Sir Patrick told the public to get used to rapid rethinks.""As you see things changing you might need to do more, you might need to do less, and that might happen quickly just as it did over the course of the last week. That isn't because there's a sudden change of strategy it is because you are responding to the information you've got,"" he said.Modelling of the outbreak changed over the weekend, as emerging data on cases suggested Britain was much closer to seeing exponential take off than believed. It also became clear that more intensive care beds would be needed because oxygen alone wasn't working for patients in Italy, China and Britain.Neil Ferguson of Imperial College, who carried out the modelling for the government, said restrictions had been imposed just in time. ""We have got the timing about right.We're about three weeks or so behind Italy, two weeks behind France and Spain, so we are making these decisions in a more timely manner than other European countries,"" he told the BBC.Mr Hunt pointed out that half of Dutch patients in intensive care for coronavirus were under 50. The figures come from a study of 96 patients and it is unclear why so many younger people needed treatment when global figures show the over-70s are much more likely to need hospitalisation.",Newspaper
172,172,Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists,"March 20, 2020 Friday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",661,661,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Giles,Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists,"E conomists are often accused of having science envy. Their models produce imprecise predictions and their forecasts are regularly poor. During the 2008 financial crisis it became clear that many of these criticisms were valid. Economic models failed to capture important properties of complex financial systems in ways evolutionary biologists and epidemiologists found staggeringly naive. The main working tools in financial markets relied on hyper-rationality when their designers and regulators should instead have been reading more sociology and anthropology.The lesson was learnt the hard way with systemic failure. Now, thanks to people such as Andy Haldane, the chief economist of the Bank of England who has spearheaded lesson-learning from other disciplines over the past decade, we can hope that those in charge are better prepared.The same cannot be said about Britain's response to the coronavirus. Some scientists close to power have clearly not been reading their economics. They have made mistakes over handling data, forecasts and communication. When UK prime minister Boris Johnson and Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific officer, proclaim ""we will do the right thing at the right time"", decent macroeconomists hold their heads in their hands. There is no polite way of putting it. The statement is nonsense.As with economic data, daily coronavirus caseload figures are out of date when they arrive and are inaccurate guides to the progression of the disease. With such profound uncertainty, there is no way anyone can be confident about setting policy with precision, even if the best behavioural scientists could say for sure how the public would react. Of course, they cannot do that either.This is the basic insight from the macroeconomic debates in the 1960s over fiscal fine tuning. At the start of that decade, economists believed a nudge on taxation here or public spending there could ensure a perfect balance between unemployment and inflation. By the end of the decade almost no economists believed it, whether they were of a Keynesian or monetarist bent. Economics can tell you that efforts to fine tune the progression of coronavirus will fail.The UK government has also failed to heed a second lesson from basic economics on time consistency. In daily life, everyone knows that promising to give up smoking tomorrow lacks credibility because delay is preferable to action. An economist would say the original pledge is ""not time consistent"". Examine the government's original mitigation strategy in this light. Believing that its models and data could predict perfectly the spread of the disease, it decided to optimise the number of deaths. Having more early on and fewer later, the government believed, would create herd immunity and prevent a second wave.Almost every other country adopted a ""suppression"" strategy, so the UK policy would inevitably have led to many more deaths in the first wave. Killing your population faster than France, Italy, Germany and South Korea might be the right strategy, but it was not politically sustainable. The policy was not time consistent and decent economists could, and did, predict it would fail.These policy choices have had consequences. To the rest of the world, the UK has looked arrogant and incompetent, a toxic mix. Sterling is suffering a steep fall as a result. The U-turns have shorn ministers and their scientific advisers of credibility. If people do not believe the prime minister will be able to do what he says and achieve results, public confidence will be lost at the most important time.Britain's government desperately needs the advice of its economists. Ministers and officials must stop claiming they are in precise control of the path of the virus and making promises they have no chance of delivering. And they must learn these lessons quickly.chris.giles@ft.comTo proclaim 'we will do the right thing at the right time' is nonsense. There is no polite way of putting it",Newspaper
173,173,Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists,"March 20, 2020 Friday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",661,661,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Giles,Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists,"E conomists are often accused of having science envy. Their models produce imprecise predictions and their forecasts are regularly poor. During the 2008 financial crisis it became clear that many of these criticisms were valid. Economic models failed to capture important properties of complex financial systems in ways evolutionary biologists and epidemiologists found staggeringly naive. The main working tools in financial markets relied on hyper-rationality when their designers and regulators should instead have been reading more sociology and anthropology.The lesson was learnt the hard way with systemic failure. Now, thanks to people such as Andy Haldane, the chief economist of the Bank of England who has spearheaded lesson-learning from other disciplines over the past decade, we can hope that those in charge are better prepared.The same cannot be said about Britain's response to the coronavirus. Some scientists close to power have clearly not been reading their economics. They have made mistakes over handling data, forecasts and communication. When UK prime minister Boris Johnson and Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific officer, proclaim ""we will do the right thing at the right time"", decent macroeconomists hold their heads in their hands. There is no polite way of putting it. The statement is nonsense.As with economic data, daily coronavirus caseload figures are out of date when they arrive and are inaccurate guides to the progression of the disease. With such profound uncertainty, there is no way anyone can be confident about setting policy with precision, even if the best behavioural scientists could say for sure how the public would react. Of course, they cannot do that either.This is the basic insight from the macroeconomic debates in the 1960s over fiscal fine tuning. At the start of that decade, economists believed a nudge on taxation here or public spending there could ensure a perfect balance between unemployment and inflation. By the end of the decade almost no economists believed it, whether they were of a Keynesian or monetarist bent. Economics can tell you that efforts to fine tune the progression of coronavirus will fail.The UK government has also failed to heed a second lesson from basic economics on time consistency. In daily life, everyone knows that promising to give up smoking tomorrow lacks credibility because delay is preferable to action. An economist would say the original pledge is ""not time consistent"". Examine the government's original mitigation strategy in this light. Believing that its models and data could predict perfectly the spread of the disease, it decided to optimise the number of deaths. Having more early on and fewer later, the government believed, would create herd immunity and prevent a second wave.Almost every other country adopted a ""suppression"" strategy, so the UK policy would inevitably have led to many more deaths in the first wave. Killing your population faster than France, Italy, Germany and South Korea might be the right strategy, but it was not politically sustainable. The policy was not time consistent and decent economists could, and did, predict it would fail.These policy choices have had consequences. To the rest of the world, the UK has looked arrogant and incompetent, a toxic mix. Sterling is suffering a steep fall as a result. The U-turns have shorn ministers and their scientific advisers of credibility. If people do not believe the prime minister will be able to do what he says and achieve results, public confidence will be lost at the most important time.Britain's government desperately needs the advice of its economists. Ministers and officials must stop claiming they are in precise control of the path of the virus and making promises they have no chance of delivering. And they must learn these lessons quickly.chris.giles@ft.comTo proclaim 'we will do the right thing at the right time' is nonsense. There is no polite way of putting it",Newspaper
174,174,Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists,"March 20, 2020 Friday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",661,661,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Giles,Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists,"E conomists are often accused of having science envy. Their models produce imprecise predictions and their forecasts are regularly poor. During the 2008 financial crisis it became clear that many of these criticisms were valid. Economic models failed to capture important properties of complex financial systems in ways evolutionary biologists and epidemiologists found staggeringly naive. The main working tools in financial markets relied on hyper-rationality when their designers and regulators should instead have been reading more sociology and anthropology.The lesson was learnt the hard way with systemic failure. Now, thanks to people such as Andy Haldane, the chief economist of the Bank of England who has spearheaded lesson-learning from other disciplines over the past decade, we can hope that those in charge are better prepared.The same cannot be said about Britain's response to the coronavirus. Some scientists close to power have clearly not been reading their economics. They have made mistakes over handling data, forecasts and communication. When UK prime minister Boris Johnson and Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific officer, proclaim ""we will do the right thing at the right time"", decent macroeconomists hold their heads in their hands. There is no polite way of putting it. The statement is nonsense.As with economic data, daily coronavirus caseload figures are out of date when they arrive and are inaccurate guides to the progression of the disease. With such profound uncertainty, there is no way anyone can be confident about setting policy with precision, even if the best behavioural scientists could say for sure how the public would react. Of course, they cannot do that either.This is the basic insight from the macroeconomic debates in the 1960s over fiscal fine tuning. At the start of that decade, economists believed a nudge on taxation here or public spending there could ensure a perfect balance between unemployment and inflation. By the end of the decade almost no economists believed it, whether they were of a Keynesian or monetarist bent. Economics can tell you that efforts to fine tune the progression of coronavirus will fail.The UK government has also failed to heed a second lesson from basic economics on time consistency. In daily life, everyone knows that promising to give up smoking tomorrow lacks credibility because delay is preferable to action. An economist would say the original pledge is ""not time consistent"". Examine the government's original mitigation strategy in this light. Believing that its models and data could predict perfectly the spread of the disease, it decided to optimise the number of deaths. Having more early on and fewer later, the government believed, would create herd immunity and prevent a second wave.Almost every other country adopted a ""suppression"" strategy, so the UK policy would inevitably have led to many more deaths in the first wave. Killing your population faster than France, Italy, Germany and South Korea might be the right strategy, but it was not politically sustainable. The policy was not time consistent and decent economists could, and did, predict it would fail.These policy choices have had consequences. To the rest of the world, the UK has looked arrogant and incompetent, a toxic mix. Sterling is suffering a steep fall as a result. The U-turns have shorn ministers and their scientific advisers of credibility. If people do not believe the prime minister will be able to do what he says and achieve results, public confidence will be lost at the most important time.Britain's government desperately needs the advice of its economists. Ministers and officials must stop claiming they are in precise control of the path of the virus and making promises they have no chance of delivering. And they must learn these lessons quickly.chris.giles@ft.comTo proclaim 'we will do the right thing at the right time' is nonsense. There is no polite way of putting it",Newspaper
180,180,Lockdown for a year is our best weapon against spread,"March 21, 2020 Saturday",International,The Times (London),1375,1375,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth; Tom Whipple,Lockdown for a year is our best weapon against spread,"Britain has gone into lockdown on the advice of about two dozen scientists who told Boris Johnson that his hands-off plan was not working and an immediate halt to socialising and the closure of schools was our only hope of avoiding a catastrophe.The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) published their conclusions and the evidence behind them yesterday. Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, said the global coronavirus pandemic was ""an incredibly fast-moving, developing situation"" and his team's findings had ""played a considerable role in shaping our recommendations on when, how and why the government has made the interventions it has so far"".Among their key points are:LOCKDOWN MUST LAST FOR A YEARUntil we get a vaccine or treatment that means fewer people need intensive care, there is no obvious way out. The plan envisions experimental relaxation of restrictions on socialising as the peak passes, with a ""trigger"" to reimpose them once intensive care beds fill up beyond a certain point.The scientists concluded: ""A policy of alternating between periods of more and less strict social-distancing measures could plausibly be effective at keeping the number of critical care cases within capacity. These would need to be in place for at least most of a year.""DIFFICULTY OF CLOSING SCHOOLSThe issue of schools appears to have been an area of genuine debate. The scientists were unanimous that ""school closures will be highly disruptive and likely to present an unequal burden to different sections of society"".It was clear to them that in shutting down schools, poorer students would suffer the most - especially those on free school meals - and parents would struggle to stay working. The committee also fretted about the possibility that grandparents would be drafted in for childcare and so exposed to yet more risk.They concluded that, despite the social costs, to give the country the best hope of suppressing the disease schools would have to close.PR OF BANNING MASS GATHERINGSWhile other countries shut down football matches and concerts, Britain's scientists concluded this would have ""very little"" effect on the outbreak. Indeed, stopping ""some public gatherings could mean people replace this with other activities, (ie playing football behind closed doors could mean fans watch the match in the pub, potentially slightly accelerating epidemic spread"".Finally, the public demand for something to be done was a key consideration. Behavioural scientists concluded that if a section of the public thought the government's actions were incompetent, there was a danger that they might ignore more effective measures.""Acting in a way that does not meet expectations poses a risk that a section of the public will view government actions as incompetent or not in the public's best interests,"" they said.DINNER WITH FRIENDS IS WORSEYesterday's shutdown of the leisure industry was based on the scientists' view that intimate gatherings were more dangerous than stadium events. ""Smaller gatherings such as bars and nightclubs are higher risk as you can be in closer contact with others. Family gatherings are particularly high risk as they bring people into closer contact. Similarly, religious services with a high level of physical contact would be higher risk,"" they wrote.PUBLIC DISORDER UNLIKELYBritain will, at least in the estimation of Sage, Keep Calm and Carry On. ""Large scale rioting is unlikely,"" the scientists concluded. ""Acts of altruism will predominate."" They advised that these could even be encouraged. ""All messaging should reinforce a sense of community, that 'we are all in this together'.""BUT ARE WE ALL IN IT TOGETHER?To bring all groups of society with them, Sage said it was crucial the pain was shared. ""Resistance and non-compliance will be greater if impacts of this policy are inequitable,"" the documents explain. This means supporting the poorest. ""For those on low incomes, loss of income means inability to pay for food, heating, lighting, internet. This can be addressed by guaranteeing supplies during quarantine periods.""INCUBATION PERIODOn average, it takes five days after a person is infected with coronavirus for them to show symptoms, twice as long as flu. This means control measures must be imposed for longer, explaining the policy of quarantining families of patients for 14 days.MIDDLE CLASS MUST SHARE PAINThe ""all in it together"" message was perceived to be at risk if the government was seen to be banning more popular activities. ""The definition of 'public gathering' leaves room for tension, as preventing larger mass gatherings (football matches, pop concerts) but leaving small mass gatherings permitted (tennis, theatre) may be perceived as unequal treatment,"" scientists warn.AT LEAST HALF WILL IGNORE ADVICEThe government was initially reluctant to impose drastic measures for fear that people would tire of them by the time they had an effect. There is also scepticism about whether an open country like Britain can cope with Chinesestyle controls.""These interventions assume compliance levels of 50 per cent or more over long periods of time. This may be unachievable in the UK population and uptake of these measures is likely to vary across groups, possibly leading to variation in outbreak intensities across different communities,"" the scientists said.THE OLD ARE NOT ALL VULNERABLEMr Johnson has urged the over-70s to pay particular attention to social distancing measures , given evidence older people are more likely to die.However, the scientists urged ""sensitivity"" in setting out who counts as vulnerable. They said: ""A blanket application of ""over 65"" may be unambiguous, but will not be helpful if this includes healthy individuals such as recently retired doctors or MPs."" The idea that older people would be ""cocooned"" is considered ""patronising"" and the idea of keeping those with particular vulnerabilities at home throughout a peak has been renamed ""shielding"". Letters, page 32; Leading article, page 33Q&AHow is a test sample taken?The first steps involve taking a swab of a person's throat or nose to collect mucus and other material. This is sent to a laboratory.What happens in the lab?The sample is purified and genetic material is extracted. The virus's genetic code is then converted from a molecule known as RNA to DNA. A technique called the polymerase chain reaction then finds a strand of DNA from the virus and rapidly produces a large number of copies so that it can be detected.How does the test recognise the virus?Scientists create two new fragments of DNA known as primers. These bind to any strand of coronavirus DNA that they encounter and are specific to the virus code so will not bind to DNA from any other source.How long does it take?Once the sample reaches the lab it can take about four hours. However, a lack of laboratory capacity can create a bottleneck that means it can take several days to get results.What are the test's advantages?It gives very few ""false positive"" results. It also provides information on how much virus is in a person's system. This may give an indication of how ill a person is likely to get, which could be used to triage patients.Disadvantages?The test will not work properly if the virus's genetic code mutates. If this happens, a new version of the test is needed. It will not successfully identify people who have had the virus but have cleared it. To identify them you need a test that is sensitive to the antibodies that they gain after having the disease. You also need good samples to begin with.How many tests is Britain doing?The government's chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, said 4,000 tests were being carried out daily.Boris Johnson has announced plans to ramp it up to 25,000 tests a day. The previous week he had said that NHS England said it would be increasing its testing from 5,000 to 10,000 a day. The head of the World Health Organisation, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said that failing to test was like ""fighting a fire blindfolded"".How the test works1 Mucus swab taken from back of throat2 RNA molecule extracted from the sample and converted to DNA3 A chemical reaction produces many copies of the virus DNA very quickly, allowing it to be detected",Newspaper
181,181,Lockdown for a year is our best weapon against spread,"March 21, 2020 Saturday",International,The Times (London),1339,1339,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Lockdown for a year is our best weapon against spread,"Britain has gone into lockdown on the advice of about two dozen scientists who told Boris Johnson that his hands-off plan was not working and an immediate halt to socialising and the closure of schools was our only hope of avoiding a catastrophe.The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) published their conclusions and the evidence behind them yesterday. Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, said the global coronavirus pandemic was ""an incredibly fast-moving, developing situation"" and his team's findings had ""played a considerable role in shaping our recommendations on when, how and why the government has made the interventions it has so far"". Among their key points are:LOCKDOWN MUST LAST FOR A YEARUntil we get a vaccine or treatment that means fewer people need intensive care, there is no obvious way out. The plan envisions experimental relaxation of restrictions on socialising as the peak passes, with a ""trigger"" to reimpose them once intensive care beds fill up beyond a certain point.The scientists concluded: ""A policy of alternating between periods of more and less strict social-distancing measures could plausibly be effective at keeping the number of critical care cases within capacity. These would need to be in place for at least most of a year.""DIFFICULTY OF CLOSING SCHOOLSThe issue of schools appears to have been an area of genuine debate. The scientists were unanimous that ""school closures will be highly disruptive and likely to present an unequal burden to different sections of society"".It was clear to them that in shutting down schools, poorer students would suffer the most - especially those on free school meals - and parents would struggle to stay working. The committee also fretted about the possibility that grandparents would be drafted in for childcare and so exposed to yet more risk.They concluded that, despite the social costs, to give the country the best hope of suppressing the disease schools would have to close.PR OF BANNING MASS GATHERINGSWhile other countries shut down football matches and concerts, Britain's scientists concluded this would have ""very little"" effect on the outbreak. Indeed, stopping ""some public gatherings could mean people replace this with other activities, (ie playing football behind closed doors could mean fans watch the match in the pub, potentially slightly accelerating epidemic spread"".Finally, the public demand for something to be done was a key consideration. Behavioural scientists concluded that if a section of the public thought the government's actions were incompetent, there was a danger that they might ignore more effective measures.""Acting in a way that does not meet expectations poses a risk that a section of the public will view government actions as incompetent or not in the public's best interests,"" they said.DINNER WITH FRIENDS IS WORSEYesterday's shutdown of the leisure industry was based on the scientists' view that intimate gatherings were more dangerous than stadium events. ""Smaller gatherings such as bars and nightclubs are higher risk as you can be in closer contact with others. Family gatherings are particularly high risk as they bring people into closer contact. Similarly, religious services with a high level of physical contact would be higher risk,"" they wrote.PUBLIC DISORDER UNLIKELYBritain will, at least in the estimation of Sage, Keep Calm and Carry On. ""Large scale rioting is unlikely,"" the scientists concluded. ""Acts of altruism will predominate."" They advised that these could even be encouraged. ""All messaging should reinforce a sense of community, that 'we are all in this together'.""BUT ARE WE ALL IN IT TOGETHER?To bring all groups of society with them, Sage said it was crucial the pain was shared. ""Resistance and non-compliance will be greater if impacts of this policy are inequitable,"" the documents explain. This means supporting the poorest. ""For those on low incomes, loss of income means inability to pay for food, heating, lighting, internet. This can be addressed by guaranteeing supplies during quarantine periods.""INCUBATION PERIODOn average, it takes five days after a person is infected with coronavirus for them to show symptoms, twice as long as flu. This means control measures must be imposed for longer, explaining the policy of quarantining families of patients for 14 days.MIDDLE CLASS MUST SHARE PAINThe ""all in it together"" message was perceived to be at risk if the government was seen to be banning more popular activities. ""The definition of 'public gathering' leaves room for tension, as preventing larger mass gatherings (football matches, pop concerts) but leaving small mass gatherings permitted (tennis, theatre) may be perceived as unequal treatment,"" scientists warn.AT LEAST HALF WILL IGNORE ADVICEThe government was initially reluctant to impose drastic measures for fear that people would tire of them by the time they had an effect. There is also scepticism about whether an open country like Britain can cope with Chinesestyle controls. ""These interventions assume compliance levels of 50 per cent or more over long periods of time. This may be unachievable in the UK population and uptake of these measures is likely to vary across groups, possibly leading to variation in outbreak intensities across different communities,"" the scientists said.THE OLD ARE NOT ALL VULNERABLEMr Johnson has urged the over-70s to pay particular attention to social distancing measures , given evidence older people are more likely to die.However, the scientists urged ""sensitivity"" in setting out who counts as vulnerable. They said: ""A blanket application of ""over 65"" may be unambiguous, but will not be helpful if this includes healthy individuals such as recently retired doctors or MPs."" The idea that older people would be ""cocooned"" is considered ""patronising"" and the idea of keeping those with particular vulnerabilities at home throughout a peak has been renamed ""shielding"". Letters, page 32; Leading article, page 33Q&AHow is a test sample taken?The first steps involve taking a swab of a person's throat or nose to collect mucus and other material. This is sent to a laboratory.What happens in the lab?The sample is purified and genetic material is extracted. The virus's genetic code is then converted from a molecule known as RNA to DNA. A technique called the polymerase chain reaction then finds a strand of DNA from the virus and rapidly produces a large number of copies so that it can be detected.How does the test recognise the virus?Scientists create two new fragments of DNA known as primers. These bind to any strand of coronavirus DNA that they encounter and are specific to the virus code so will not bind to DNA from any other source.How long does it take?Once the sample reaches the lab it can take about four hours. However, a lack of laboratory capacity can create a bottleneck that means it can take several days to get results.What are the test's advantages?It gives very few ""false positive"" results. It also provides information on how much virus is in a person's system. This may give an indication of how ill a person is likely to get, which could be used to triage patients.Disadvantages?The test will not work properly if the virus's genetic code mutates. If this happens, a new version of the test is needed. It will not successfully identify people who have had the virus but have cleared it. To identify them you need a test that is sensitive to the antibodies that they gain after having the disease. You also need good samples to begin with.How many tests is Britain doing?The government's chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, said 4,000 tests were being carried out daily.Boris Johnson has announced plans to ramp it up to 25,000 tests a day. The previous week he had said that NHS England said it would be increasing its testing from 5,000 to 10,000 a day. The head of the World Health Organisation, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said that failing to test was like ""fighting a fire blindfolded"".",Newspaper
182,182,Lockdown for a year is our best weapon against spread,"March 21, 2020 Saturday",International,thetimes.co.uk,1049,1049,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"Chris Smyth, Whitehall Editor | Tom Whipple, Science Editor",Lockdown for a year is our best weapon against spread,"Britain has gone into lockdown on the advice of about two dozen scientists who told Boris Johnson that his hands-off plan was not working and an immediate halt to socialising and the closure of schools was our only hope of avoiding a catastrophe.The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) published their conclusions and the evidence behind them yesterday. Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, said the global coronavirus pandemic was ""an incredibly fast-moving, developing situation"" and his team's findings had ""played a considerable role in shaping our recommendations on when, how and why the government has made the interventions it has so far"".Among their key points are:                   LOCKDOWN MUST LAST FOR A YEAR                   Until we get a vaccine or treatment that means fewer people need intensive care, there is no obvious way out. The plan envisions experimental relaxation of restrictions on socialising as the peak passes, with a ""trigger"" to reimpose them once intensive care beds fill up beyond a certain point.The scientists concluded: ""A policy of alternating between periods of more and less strict social-distancing measures could plausibly be effective at keeping the number of critical care cases within capacity. These would need to be in place for at least most of a year.""                   DIFFICULTY OF CLOSING SCHOOLS                   The issue of schools appears to have been an area of genuine debate. The scientists were unanimous that ""school closures will be highly disruptive and likely to present an unequal burden to different sections of society"".It was clear to them that in shutting down schools, poorer students would suffer the most - especially those on free school meals - and parents would struggle to stay working. The committee also fretted about the possibility that grandparents would be drafted in for childcare and so exposed to yet more risk.They concluded that, despite the social costs, to give the country the best hope of suppressing the disease schools would have to close.                   PR OF BANNING MASS GATHERINGS                   While other countries shut down football matches and concerts, Britain's scientists concluded this would have ""very little"" effect on the outbreak. Indeed, stopping ""some public gatherings could mean people replace this with other activities, (ie playing football behind closed doors could mean fans watch the match in the pub, potentially slightly accelerating epidemic spread"".Finally, the public demand for something to be done was a key consideration. Behavioural scientists concluded that if a section of the public thought the government's actions were incompetent, there was a danger that they might ignore more effective measures.""Acting in a way that does not meet expectations poses a risk that a section of the public will view government actions as incompetent or not in the public's best interests,"" they said.                   DINNER WITH FRIENDS IS WORSE                   Yesterday's shutdown of the leisure industry was based on the scientists' view that intimate gatherings were more dangerous than stadium events. ""Smaller gatherings such as bars and nightclubs are higher risk as you can be in closer contact with others. Family gatherings are particularly high risk as they bring people into closer contact. Similarly, religious services with a high level of physical contact would be higher risk,"" they wrote.                   PUBLIC DISORDER IS UNLIKELY                   Britain will, at least in the estimation of Sage, Keep Calm and Carry On. ""Large scale rioting is unlikely,"" the scientists concluded. ""Acts of altruism will predominate."" They advised that these could even be encouraged. ""All messaging should reinforce a sense of community, that 'we are all in this together'.""                   BUT ARE WE ALL IN IT TOGETHER?                   To bring all groups of society with them, Sage said it was crucial the pain was shared. ""Resistance and non-compliance will be greater if impacts of this policy are inequitable,"" the documents explain. This means supporting the poorest. ""For those on low incomes, loss of income means inability to pay for food, heating, lighting, internet. This can be addressed by guaranteeing supplies during quarantine periods.""                   INCUBATION PERIOD                   On average, it takes five days for a person infected with coronavirus to show symptoms, twice as long as flu. This means control measures must be imposed for longer, hence quarantining families of patients for 14 days.                   MIDDLE CLASS MUST SHARE PAIN                   The ""all in it together"" message was perceived to be at risk if the government was seen to be banning more popular activities. ""The definition of 'public gathering' leaves room for tension, as preventing larger mass gatherings (football matches, pop concerts) but leaving small mass gatherings permitted (tennis, theatre) may be perceived as unequal treatment,"" scientists warn.                   AT LEAST HALF WILL IGNORE ADVICE                   The government was initially reluctant to impose drastic measures for fear that people would tire of them before they had an effect. There was also scepticism about whether Britain can cope with Chinese-style controls. ""These interventions assume compliance levels of 50 per cent or more over long periods of time. This may be unachievable in the UK population and uptake of these measures is likely to vary across groups, possibly leading to variation in outbreak intensities across different communities,"" the scientists said.                   THE OLD ARE NOT ALL VULNERABLE                   Mr Johnson has urged the over-70s to pay particular attention to social distancing measures , given evidence older people are more likely to dieHowever, the scientists urged ""sensitivity"" in setting out who counts as vulnerable. They said: ""A blanket application of ""over 65"" may be unambiguous, but will not be helpful if this includes healthy individuals such as recently retired doctors or MPs."" The idea that older people would be ""cocooned"" is considered ""patronising"" and the idea of keeping those with particular vulnerabilities at home throughout a peak has been renamed ""shielding"".",Newspaper; Web Publication
184,184,Early warnings help but old strategy flawed;Analysis Cache of reports reveals that 2011 pandemic preparation plan misses the target catastrophically,"March 21, 2020 Saturday",International,The Daily Telegraph (London),623,623,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Paul Nuki,Early warnings help but old strategy flawedAnalysis Cache of reports reveals that 2011 pandemic preparation plan misses the target catastrophically,"AT MIDDAY yesterday a cache of some 30 documents dropped on to the government website, many of them stamped ""official"". They detail the evidence, advice and thinking behind the UK's response to the coronavirus pandemic and are an exercise in transparency.When the Prime Minister says, as he now frequently does, that he is being guided by the experts, this is the advice he is looking at. It's all there, M'lud - the pandemic modelling, the behavioural insights, the discussion on school closures, everything.Journalists will be crawling over these papers for a long time to come, but there are some quick takeaways.First, they highlight the role played by Prof Neil Ferguson and his team of epidemiologists at Imperial College London. If you are looking for superheros in this crisis, and we probably should be, this is the A-team.They were on to the outbreak in Wuhan as soon as it was first reported in late December, correctly modelling both transmissibility of the virus and its virulence.""It is likely that the Wuhan outbreak of a novel coronavirus has caused substantially more cases of moderate or severe respiratory illness than currently reported"", they told Whitehall on Jan 17.And then on Feb 10: ""For cases detected in Hubei, we estimate the case fatality ratio (CFR) to be 18 per cent. For cases detected in travellers outside mainland China, we obtain central estimates of the CFR in the range 1.2 to 5.6 per cent"".These numbers would have triggered alarm bells. There is debate about whether the UK will follow Italy in terms of the epidemic's fearful impact in the next few weeks. It is not a question that can be answered now with certainty, but if we avoid it, it will be in part because of these early warnings.It is also clear there was a debate raging within government by late February - two weeks before any announcement - on the extent of the lockdown needed to stop the epidemic overwhelming the NHS. A paper dated Feb 26 shows they knew by then that China's containment strategy was working, but were reluctant to adopt the same measures here - partly because of fears that, when lifted, they would spark a second outbreak in the run up to Christmas.So why does it feel we were not ready for this pandemic? Why did the debate over lockdown come so late? And why are we only now working out the economic impact? The answer, I think, is that the nation's original pandemic strategy document - UK Influenza Pandemic Preparedness Strategy 2011 - catastrophically misses the target. I read it only a month ago and thought it pretty comprehensive. But when you look at it now with the benefit of hindsight it has two glaring holes.First, it never imagines the sort of lockdown we are moving into might ever occur. Under the heading ""Business as usual"" on page 57, it breezily states: ""During a pandemic, the Government will encourage those who are well to carry on with their normal daily lives for as long and as far as that is possible ... The UK Government does not plan to close borders, stop mass gatherings or impose controls on public transport during any pandemic.""There is, consequently perhaps, virtually no discussion of the economic impact a pandemic might have on the nation. It notes in a table that the Spanish flu knocked somewhere between 2.4 per cent and 16.9 per cent off GDP but there is no analysis.When the inquisition comes, I suspect it will focus not so much on today's documents, but the one published by the Department of Health back in 2011.They will ask why, post Sars, which resulted in lockdown and an economic hit of £34 billion, we were not better prepared? The Prime Minister will be quick to point out it was David Cameron, George Osborne and Nick Clegg who were in charge back then.",Newspaper
188,188,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for ever;The inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","March 22, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),3037,3037,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,TIM SHIPMAN ;CAROLINE WHEELER,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for everThe inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","There was a moment, when the decisions were made, when they wondered what on earth they had done, how far they had been forced to go. A moment when they sat ""shellshocked"", reflecting on choices that will change Britain for the rest of our lives. ""It took us the weekend to get ourselves into the emotional position where we were comfortable taking the decisions we took,"" a minister said. ""They were massive.""In politics, there is so much overstatement. Not this time. Ten days ago the government was slowly gearing up its response to the coronavirus crisis, downplaying the need for drastic measures. By Monday, Boris Johnson had ordered an expansion of the state not seen since the Second World War to save the National Health Service, an institution formed in the cauldron of that conflict. A wartimestyle lockdown of the capital was under active consideration.This weekend, the events of the last week have already changed health policy, changed the economy and are already changing the people involved.The last time the British state began a multiple service attack on a lurking enemy - D-Day in 1944 - it became known as The Longest Day. On Thursday one cabinet minister reflected: ""It feels like the longest week. It felt like Brexit was going to change the country but it is the coronavirus that will do that now.""Senior figures in government are insistent that the changes they made to the virus clampdown were not ""a U-turn"" but a vehicle accelerating faster along a track already laid. In truth, they no more resemble what went before than the space shuttle did a Citroën 2CV.Conversations with more than a dozen ministers and cabinet ministers, special advisers, Downing Street staff and civil servants reveal a human drama, of leaders tested as never before and of the single most frightening warning a British prime minister has received in eight decades.A SHOCK TO THE SYSTEM The meeting that will change British society for a generation took place on the evening of Thursday, March 12. That was when the strategic advisory group of experts (Sage in Whitehall parlance), the government's committee of scientists and medics, gathered to examine modelling from experts at Imperial College London and other institutions.The results were shattering. A week earlier, councils had been warned to expect about 100,000 deaths from Covid-19. Now Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, and Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, realised the estimates were wrong.""Unmitigated, the death number was 510,000,"" a senior figure said. ""Mitigated we were told it was going to be 250,000. Once you see a figure of take no further action and a quarter of a million people die, the question you ask is, 'What action?'"" Another insider said: ""There was a collision between the science and reality.""Ministers had been on notice that drastic action might be needed since the virus first emerged in China's Wuhan province in December. In January, Whitty told the cabinet: ""It either stays in China or it will get everywhere."" For two months the government had time to prepare, but Johnson's instincts were to resist a lifechanging crackdown. ""There was a lot of talk about how this was just a bit of flu,"" one senior Tory recalled.Dominic Cummings, the prime minister's senior aide, became convinced that Britain would be better able to resist a lethal second wave of the disease next winter if Whitty's prediction that 60% to 80% of the population became infected was right and the UK developed ""herd immunity"".At a private engagement at the end of February, Cummings outlined the government's strategy. Those present say it was ""herd immunity, protect the economy and if that means some pensioners die, too bad"".At the Sage meeting on March 12, a moment now dubbed the ""Domoscene conversion"", Cummings changed his mind. In this ""penny-drop moment"", he realised he had helped set a course for catastrophe. Until this point, the rise in British infections had been below the European average. Now they were above it and on course to emulate Italy, where the picture was bleak. A minister said: ""Seeing what was happening in Italy was the galvanising force across government.""By Friday the 13th, Cummings had become the most outspoken advocate of a tough crackdown. ""Dominic himself had a conversion,"" a senior Tory said. ""He's gone from 'herd immunity and let the old people die', to 'let's shut down the country and the economy.'"" Cummings had a ""meeting of minds"" with Matt Hancock, the health secretary, who wanted stronger action to prevent NHS hospitals being swamped. Department of Health officials had impressed on Hancock that the death rate in Wuhan province was 3.4% when the hospitals were overrun and 0.7% elsewhere in China.Johnson had also been queasy about the previous original approach. ""Boris hated the language of 'herd immunity' because it implied that it was OK for people to die,"" a senior source said. ""Matt hated the language because it implied we had given up. You've got to fight.""HERD IMMUNITY The problem for the government was that at the moment herd immunity was being banished from policy, it had become the focus of publicity. That Wednesday, David Halpern of the Whitehall ""nudge unit"" put the phrase in the public domain. On Friday the 13th, Vallance repeated the idea on Radio 4. With Italy, France and Spain going into lockdown, the government's critics accused Johnson of refusing to act because he wanted people to get ill.Insiders say it was ""very bumpy"" that Friday. ""The meetings were very messy,"" said one source. But when Johnson gathered his key advisers in the cabinet room at 9.15am last Saturday there was unanimity. Whitty and Vallance explained that Britain had been four weeks behind Italy ""and now we are closer"".The two experts, together with Hancock and Cummings, all delivered to Johnson one message: ""Now is the moment to act."" The prime minister agreed: ""We must work around the clock and take all necessary measures."" One of those present said: ""The mood in the room was astonishing. You could tell that something very significant had shifted.""Flesh was added to the bones in another crunch meeting in Downing Street on Sunday night and again in the 9.15am meetings and bilaterals between Johnson and key cabinet ministers throughout last week.The media was briefed that elderly and vulnerable people might have to self-isolate for a period of months and that everyone else would have to engage in ""social distancing"" - working from home, avoiding groups and unnecessary outings. Most significantly, without a gargantuan package of support for businesses, renters and the self-employed, millions of jobs would be lost and the economy would collapse.THE ECONOMIC RESPONSE On Tuesday morning, as he prepared to unveil details of Britain's biggest peacetime financial package, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, gathered his closest aides and officials in his book-lined study in 11 Downing Street. ""The scale of what is required is beyond anyone's current imagination,"" he said. ""We have to remove all limiting assumptions.""Over the weekend, Treasury officials worked through the night to prepare a package for business as if planning a full budget. ""They did three months' work in 48 hours,"" a Treasury source said. It helped that Charles Roxburgh, the second permanent secretary, and Andrew Bailey, the new governor of the Bank of England, were both veterans of the response to the 2008 financial crash.When he walked out with Johnson for a Downing Street news conference on Tuesday afternoon, aides were still finalising Sunak's comments as the statement came off the printer. The chancellor had no time to rehearse or to prepare for questions but gave an assured performance as he outlined plans for £350bn of government-backed loans and cash grants for business. ""We will do whatever it takes,"" he repeatedly intoned.Colleagues say Sunak's confidence came because he is deeply engaged ""in the weeds"" of the policy. ""Some ministers set the broad parameters for 15 minutes and the officials go away and do the work,"" said one source. ""He's more hands-on. He prefers a 30 to 40-minute meeting where he can properly kick the tyres and help solve the problems. He's across the detail.""Measures to help save jobs took longer, with a plan for the government to pay a high percentage of wages in cashstrapped firms finally being announced on Friday afternoon. Sunak agreed the package in a meeting with Johnson on Thursday night in which the pair shared a vegetarian takeaway pizza. The prime minister said: ""In 2008, the government looked after the bankers. Now we must make sure we look after the people first.""At 11.30pm the chancellor was sending messages to his permanent secretary thanking him for the ""superb"" work of some officials. A colleague said: ""He's got the brainpower. More importantly, he's got the character for this moment.""Sunak will need it because the risks are immense. One friend said: ""Rishi is very acutely aware that we are in danger of driving the economy off a cliff by shutting everything up. All this talk of bouncing straight back … we will have no airlines to bounce straight back with if we're not careful.""The prime minister's big decision on Wednesday was that schools would close on Friday, a decision arrived at with Gavin Williamson, the education secretary. They decided to act as many schools took matters into their own hands, to try to ensure childcare for key workers.It was another decision Johnson had resisted the week before, but cabinet ministers are clear that behind the scenes he has been far more decisive at crunch moments than his predecessor. ""He's been absolutely brilliant,"" said one. ""He makes decisions fast."" Another said: ""If Theresa May was still be in charge we would, by now, have just about signed off a request that people wash their hands."" Another cabinet source added: ""And if Philip Hammond was still chancellor he would have refused even to pay for that.""Nonetheless, even admirers admit that Johnson is not finding it easy to project the same decisiveness in his somewhat hesitant public appearances. ""He's a naturally cheerful person,"" one colleague said. ""He finds it difficult to deliver bad news."" Business leaders were surprised during a conference call on Monday, when he was trying to persuade them to build ventilators, to hear him describe the effort as ""Operation Last Gasp"".Whitty and Vallance began their own press conferences at the end of the week amid concern that some of Johnson's pronouncements - including a claim that they could ""turn the tide"" within 12 weeks - were not grounded in evidence. ""Some of the experts are appalled by some of his claims,"" a Whitehall source said. A Tory aide said: ""Boris looks haunted. It's like when George W Bush came in thinking he was going to be the education-reforming president and had to deal with the war on terror."" Another senior Tory said: ""Boris is shellshocked.""LOCKDOWN Johnson, who is a civil libertarian at heart, spent the week resisting Cummings's demands for a full-blown lockdown of London - banning inhabitants from travelling outside the city.Discussions about a shutdown were first aired at Cobra on Friday the 13th. By Tuesday the news was leaking after a Cabinet Office official emailed other departments to ask how a curfew might work. A Whitehall insider said: ""It was quickly established that the Paris model - with people being issued paperwork and allowed out of the family home one at a time would not work.""A senior Tory said: ""Boris really doesn't want to shut stuff down. He is more worried than most about the economic impact but also the social impact of locking people up in their homes for months. Fundamentally there is a Boris-Dom cleavage. First Boris bottled herd immunity. Now he's bottling lockdown.""Nonetheless, Johnson managed to fuel speculation that there would be troops on the streets and a travel ban by telling Wednesday's press conference that the government ""will not hesitate"" to take further steps. ""We live in a land of liberty,"" he said. ""But we will rule nothing out.""On Thursday the PM's spokesman was forced to say there were ""no plans"" to close down London transport and ""zero prospect"" of restrictions on travel. On Friday less draconian restrictions, closing pubs, clubs and restaurants nationwide, were unveiled. ""Whoever was briefing details of the full lockdown is bordering on a national security threat,"" said one Tory with links at the top of Whitehall. ""They are promulgating misinformation and spreading alarm."" Another source said the loose talk could have seen wealthy ""superspreaders"" flee London to infect people elsewhere: ""If you're going to do a lockdown you don't tell people first or you find they are all on the roof getting the last helicopter out of Saigon.""Nonetheless, Whitehall officials are quietly drawing up lists of key workers who would be issued with a travel permit if a full crackdown follows. Officials have also been working on a ""lockdown list"" of products that must be manufactured by law. They may yet be necessary. A minister said: ""We won't know for two weeks if the current measures are enough.""COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS On Thursday, after criticism from ministers and MPs that No 10 had failed to pro-vide clear messages to the public, Cummings and the communications director, Lee Cain, summoned the team who won the general election.Isaac Levido, the Tory campaign director, went to No 10, with former Vote Leave hands Paul Stephenson and Henry de Zoete on a video conference call. Together they devised a slogan ""Stay home. Save lives. Protect our NHS,"" which was rolled out on Friday.The No 10 morning meeting is now held on the Zoom video app to allow more home working. To try to raise morale, Johnson has also sent video messages thanking civil servants for their hard work. On Tuesday he returned from a morning run with his dog Dilyn to find his spokesman, James Slack, at the back of No 10 wishing his mother a happy birthday. Johnson took the phone and spoke to her for 10 minutes.However, many sources report that the Downing Street machine is fast running out of steam. ""Everyone is working to capacity and is absolutely exhausted,"" said one insider. ""It's utter chaos and there is no end in sight.""Businesses phoning up to offer help say Downing Street seems ""swamped"". One ventilator manufacturer claimed on Newsnight that the government had not put in any orders - though sources say 1,400 firms are offering to build them and by Friday morning eight companies who have never made a ventilator were turning them out.Some in Downing Street are turning to drink. An aide joked on Thursday that they had run out of hand sanitiser and were ""using the contents of a vodka miniature"" instead. Others are recruiting old friends. Gabriel Milland, a former head of press to Michael Gove, was drafted into No 10 last week. Tom Shinner, the civil servant who did the most to prepare Britain for a no-deal Brexit, who left the government last year, has also been rehired.MINISTERIAL INFIGHTING The toll is telling on ministers and tensions between them have bubbled over. ""It's miserable and horrible and you just have to get on with it,"" a cabinet minister said.The ""core four"" in all the key meetings are the chairmen of four inter-ministerial committees: Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, who chairs the international committee; Sunak, who chairs the economic committee; Hancock, who chairs the health committee; and Gove, who chairs the other public sector committee.Numerous sources say Gove has repeatedly sniped at Hancock. ""There have been tensions over where responsibilities begin and end,"" one observed. Some ministers are lobbying to see Gove take charge if Johnson is incapacitated with Covid-19 or if he takes paternity leave, though Sunak ranks higher in the cabinet rankings on the www.gov.uk website and the job is likely to be Raab's, since he is officially ""first secretary of state"".But a minister said: ""Considering the scale of the massive decisions we have been making it has been remarkably collegiate.""Ministers hope the dramatic events of the last week will reduce the likely death toll from Covid-19 to ""a bad seasonal flu"", which means tens, not hundreds, of thousands of deaths. The worst recent year was 2014-15 when 28,000 people died.But there are perils ahead. ""Boris and his team are absolutely terrified because it will not be the NHS by end of this,"" a Whitehall source said. ""It will be the corona health service and will just be there to pump oxygen into patients.""MPs speculate that there will be two big inquiries - an international one into the origins of the virus in China's live animal ""wet markets""; and a second into the government's preparations and policy decisions. ""If we end up like Italy in two weeks' time and 30-year-old doctors are dropping dead, the government is going to be in big trouble,"" a Labour MP said.SHAKING THE WORLD Amid the frenzy of events, more thoughtful Tories have concluded that the decisions taken last week will change three key aspects of the way the world works. One said: ""One is the debate around globalisation. Is Trump right that we just need to build bigger walls, or is Gordon Brown right that global problems need global solutions? The second is Socialism v The Free Market. Large parts of the economy are going to be socialised after this. I fear it leads to nationalists and socialists winning, to national socialism.""The third fissure may yet be the worst.""It's the intergenerational question. It is unsustainable to have people in their youth put their whole life on hold for months while the economy tanks to save a 91-year-old who would have died six months later anyway.""Whatever the outcome, ministers have little doubt about the significance of the virus. ""It's shaking the world,"" one said. Another, who has been up to his neck in the dramas of the past three years, was more prosaic: ""My obituary gets more interesting every week.""The sadness is that there will be many other obituaries to be written too.The PM was told: Now is the moment to actDon't tell people you're going into lockdown or they'll all be getting on the last helicopter out",Newspaper
189,189,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for ever;The inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","March 22, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),3037,3037,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,TIM SHIPMAN,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for everThe inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","There was a moment, when the decisions were made, when they wondered what on earth they had done, how far they had been forced to go. A moment when they sat ""shellshocked"", reflecting on choices that will change Britain for the rest of our lives. ""It took us the weekend to get ourselves into the emotional position where we were comfortable taking the decisions we took,"" a minister said. ""They were massive.""In politics, there is so much overstatement. Not this time. Ten days ago the government was slowly gearing up its response to the coronavirus crisis, downplaying the need for drastic measures. By Monday, Boris Johnson had ordered an expansion of the state not seen since the Second World War to save the National Health Service, an institution formed in the cauldron of that conflict. A wartimestyle lockdown of the capital was under active consideration.This weekend, the events of the last week have already changed health policy, changed the economy and are already changing the people involved.The last time the British state began a multiple service attack on a lurking enemy - D-Day in 1944 - it became known as The Longest Day. On Thursday one cabinet minister reflected: ""It feels like the longest week. It felt like Brexit was going to change the country but it is the coronavirus that will do that now.""Senior figures in government are insistent that the changes they made to the virus clampdown were not ""a U-turn"" but a vehicle accelerating faster along a track already laid. In truth, they no more resemble what went before than the space shuttle did a Citroën 2CV.Conversations with more than a dozen ministers and cabinet ministers, special advisers, Downing Street staff and civil servants reveal a human drama, of leaders tested as never before and of the single most frightening warning a British prime minister has received in eight decades.A SHOCK TO THE SYSTEM The meeting that will change British society for a generation took place on the evening of Thursday, March 12. That was when the strategic advisory group of experts (Sage in Whitehall parlance), the government's committee of scientists and medics, gathered to examine modelling from experts at Imperial College London and other institutions.The results were shattering. A week earlier, councils had been warned to expect about 100,000 deaths from Covid-19. Now Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, and Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, realised the estimates were wrong.""Unmitigated, the death number was 510,000,"" a senior figure said. ""Mitigated we were told it was going to be 250,000. Once you see a figure of take no further action and a quarter of a million people die, the question you ask is, 'What action?'"" Another insider said: ""There was a collision between the science and reality.""Ministers had been on notice that drastic action might be needed since the virus first emerged in China's Wuhan province in December. In January, Whitty told the cabinet: ""It either stays in China or it will get everywhere."" For two months the government had time to prepare, but Johnson's instincts were to resist a lifechanging crackdown. ""There was a lot of talk about how this was just a bit of flu,"" one senior Tory recalled.Dominic Cummings, the prime minister's senior aide, became convinced that Britain would be better able to resist a lethal second wave of the disease next winter if Whitty's prediction that 60% to 80% of the population became infected was right and the UK developed ""herd immunity"".At a private engagement at the end of February, Cummings outlined the government's strategy. Those present say it was ""herd immunity, protect the economy and if that means some pensioners die, too bad"".At the Sage meeting on March 12, a moment now dubbed the ""Domoscene conversion"", Cummings changed his mind. In this ""penny-drop moment"", he realised he had helped set a course for catastrophe. Until this point, the rise in British infections had been below the European average. Now they were above it and on course to emulate Italy, where the picture was bleak. A minister said: ""Seeing what was happening in Italy was the galvanising force across government.""By Friday the 13th, Cummings had become the most outspoken advocate of a tough crackdown. ""Dominic himself had a conversion,"" a senior Tory said. ""He's gone from 'herd immunity and let the old people die', to 'let's shut down the country and the economy.'"" Cummings had a ""meeting of minds"" with Matt Hancock, the health secretary, who wanted stronger action to prevent NHS hospitals being swamped. Department of Health officials had impressed on Hancock that the death rate in Wuhan province was 3.4% when the hospitals were overrun and 0.7% elsewhere in China.Johnson had also been queasy about the previous original approach. ""Boris hated the language of 'herd immunity' because it implied that it was OK for people to die,"" a senior source said. ""Matt hated the language because it implied we had given up. You've got to fight.""HERD IMMUNITY The problem for the government was that at the moment herd immunity was being banished from policy, it had become the focus of publicity. That Wednesday, David Halpern of the Whitehall ""nudge unit"" put the phrase in the public domain. On Friday the 13th, Vallance repeated the idea on Radio 4. With Italy, France and Spain going into lockdown, the government's critics accused Johnson of refusing to act because he wanted people to get ill.Insiders say it was ""very bumpy"" that Friday. ""The meetings were very messy,"" said one source. But when Johnson gathered his key advisers in the cabinet room at 9.15am last Saturday there was unanimity. Whitty and Vallance explained that Britain had been four weeks behind Italy ""and now we are closer"".The two experts, together with Hancock and Cummings, all delivered to Johnson one message: ""Now is the moment to act."" The prime minister agreed: ""We must work around the clock and take all necessary measures."" One of those present said: ""The mood in the room was astonishing. You could tell that something very significant had shifted.""Flesh was added to the bones in another crunch meeting in Downing Street on Sunday night and again in the 9.15am meetings and bilaterals between Johnson and key cabinet ministers throughout last week.The media was briefed that elderly and vulnerable people might have to self-isolate for a period of months and that everyone else would have to engage in ""social distancing"" - working from home, avoiding groups and unnecessary outings. Most significantly, without a gargantuan package of support for businesses, renters and the self-employed, millions of jobs would be lost and the economy would collapse.THE ECONOMIC RESPONSE On Tuesday morning, as he prepared to unveil details of Britain's biggest peacetime financial package, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, gathered his closest aides and officials in his book-lined study in 11 Downing Street. ""The scale of what is required is beyond anyone's current imagination,"" he said. ""We have to remove all limiting assumptions.""Over the weekend, Treasury officials worked through the night to prepare a package for business as if planning a full budget. ""They did three months' work in 48 hours,"" a Treasury source said. It helped that Charles Roxburgh, the second permanent secretary, and Andrew Bailey, the new governor of the Bank of England, were both veterans of the response to the 2008 financial crash.When he walked out with Johnson for a Downing Street news conference on Tuesday afternoon, aides were still finalising Sunak's comments as the statement came off the printer. The chancellor had no time to rehearse or to prepare for questions but gave an assured performance as he outlined plans for £350bn of government-backed loans and cash grants for business. ""We will do whatever it takes,"" he repeatedly intoned.Colleagues say Sunak's confidence came because he is deeply engaged ""in the weeds"" of the policy. ""Some ministers set the broad parameters for 15 minutes and the officials go away and do the work,"" said one source. ""He's more hands-on. He prefers a 30 to 40-minute meeting where he can properly kick the tyres and help solve the problems. He's across the detail.""Measures to help save jobs took longer, with a plan for the government to pay a high percentage of wages in cashstrapped firms finally being announced on Friday afternoon. Sunak agreed the package in a meeting with Johnson on Thursday night in which the pair shared a vegetarian takeaway pizza. The prime minister said: ""In 2008, the government looked after the bankers. Now we must make sure we look after the people first.""At 11.30pm the chancellor was sending messages to his permanent secretary thanking him for the ""superb"" work of some officials. A colleague said: ""He's got the brainpower. More importantly, he's got the character for this moment.""Sunak will need it because the risks are immense. One friend said: ""Rishi is very acutely aware that we are in danger of driving the economy off a cliff by shutting everything up. All this talk of bouncing straight back … we will have no airlines to bounce straight back with if we're not careful.""The prime minister's big decision on Wednesday was that schools would close on Friday, a decision arrived at with Gavin Williamson, the education secretary. They decided to act as many schools took matters into their own hands, to try to ensure childcare for key workers.It was another decision Johnson had resisted the week before, but cabinet ministers are clear that behind the scenes he has been far more decisive at crunch moments than his predecessor. ""He's been absolutely brilliant,"" said one. ""He makes decisions fast."" Another said: ""If Theresa May was still be in charge we would, by now, have just about signed off a request that people wash their hands."" Another cabinet source added: ""And if Philip Hammond was still chancellor he would have refused even to pay for that.""Nonetheless, even admirers admit that Johnson is not finding it easy to project the same decisiveness in his somewhat hesitant public appearances. ""He's a naturally cheerful person,"" one colleague said. ""He finds it difficult to deliver bad news."" Business leaders were surprised during a conference call on Monday, when he was trying to persuade them to build ventilators, to hear him describe the effort as ""Operation Last Gasp"".Whitty and Vallance began their own press conferences at the end of the week amid concern that some of Johnson's pronouncements - including a claim that they could ""turn the tide"" within 12 weeks - were not grounded in evidence. ""Some of the experts are appalled by some of his claims,"" a Whitehall source said. A Tory aide said: ""Boris looks haunted. It's like when George W Bush came in thinking he was going to be the education-reforming president and had to deal with the war on terror."" Another senior Tory said: ""Boris is shellshocked.""LOCKDOWN Johnson, who is a civil libertarian at heart, spent the week resisting Cummings's demands for a full-blown lockdown of London - banning inhabitants from travelling outside the city.Discussions about a shutdown were first aired at Cobra on Friday the 13th. By Tuesday the news was leaking after a Cabinet Office official emailed other departments to ask how a curfew might work. A Whitehall insider said: ""It was quickly established that the Paris model - with people being issued paperwork and allowed out of the family home one at a time would not work.""A senior Tory said: ""Boris really doesn't want to shut stuff down. He is more worried than most about the economic impact but also the social impact of locking people up in their homes for months. Fundamentally there is a Boris-Dom cleavage. First Boris bottled herd immunity. Now he's bottling lockdown.""Nonetheless, Johnson managed to fuel speculation that there would be troops on the streets and a travel ban by telling Wednesday's press conference that the government ""will not hesitate"" to take further steps. ""We live in a land of liberty,"" he said. ""But we will rule nothing out.""On Thursday the PM's spokesman was forced to say there were ""no plans"" to close down London transport and ""zero prospect"" of restrictions on travel. On Friday less draconian restrictions, closing pubs, clubs and restaurants nationwide, were unveiled. ""Whoever was briefing details of the full lockdown is bordering on a national security threat,"" said one Tory with links at the top of Whitehall. ""They are promulgating misinformation and spreading alarm."" Another source said the loose talk could have seen wealthy ""superspreaders"" flee London to infect people elsewhere: ""If you're going to do a lockdown you don't tell people first or you find they are all on the roof getting the last helicopter out of Saigon.""Nonetheless, Whitehall officials are quietly drawing up lists of key workers who would be issued with a travel permit if a full crackdown follows. Officials have also been working on a ""lockdown list"" of products that must be manufactured by law. They may yet be necessary. A minister said: ""We won't know for two weeks if the current measures are enough.""COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS On Thursday, after criticism from ministers and MPs that No 10 had failed to pro-vide clear messages to the public, Cummings and the communications director, Lee Cain, summoned the team who won the general election.Isaac Levido, the Tory campaign director, went to No 10, with former Vote Leave hands Paul Stephenson and Henry de Zoete on a video conference call. Together they devised a slogan ""Stay home. Save lives. Protect our NHS,"" which was rolled out on Friday.The No 10 morning meeting is now held on the Zoom video app to allow more home working. To try to raise morale, Johnson has also sent video messages thanking civil servants for their hard work. On Tuesday he returned from a morning run with his dog Dilyn to find his spokesman, James Slack, at the back of No 10 wishing his mother a happy birthday. Johnson took the phone and spoke to her for 10 minutes.However, many sources report that the Downing Street machine is fast running out of steam. ""Everyone is working to capacity and is absolutely exhausted,"" said one insider. ""It's utter chaos and there is no end in sight.""Businesses phoning up to offer help say Downing Street seems ""swamped"". One ventilator manufacturer claimed on Newsnight that the government had not put in any orders - though sources say 1,400 firms are offering to build them and by Friday morning eight companies who have never made a ventilator were turning them out.Some in Downing Street are turning to drink. An aide joked on Thursday that they had run out of hand sanitiser and were ""using the contents of a vodka miniature"" instead. Others are recruiting old friends. Gabriel Milland, a former head of press to Michael Gove, was drafted into No 10 last week. Tom Shinner, the civil servant who did the most to prepare Britain for a no-deal Brexit, who left the government last year, has also been rehired.MINISTERIAL INFIGHTING The toll is telling on ministers and tensions between them have bubbled over. ""It's miserable and horrible and you just have to get on with it,"" a cabinet minister said.The ""core four"" in all the key meetings are the chairmen of four inter-ministerial committees: Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, who chairs the international committee; Sunak, who chairs the economic committee; Hancock, who chairs the health committee; and Gove, who chairs the other public sector committee.Numerous sources say Gove has repeatedly sniped at Hancock. ""There have been tensions over where responsibilities begin and end,"" one observed. Some ministers are lobbying to see Gove take charge if Johnson is incapacitated with Covid-19 or if he takes paternity leave, though Sunak ranks higher in the cabinet rankings on the www.gov.uk website and the job is likely to be Raab's, since he is officially ""first secretary of state"".But a minister said: ""Considering the scale of the massive decisions we have been making it has been remarkably collegiate.""Ministers hope the dramatic events of the last week will reduce the likely death toll from Covid-19 to ""a bad seasonal flu"", which means tens, not hundreds, of thousands of deaths. The worst recent year was 2014-15 when 28,000 people died.But there are perils ahead. ""Boris and his team are absolutely terrified because it will not be the NHS by end of this,"" a Whitehall source said. ""It will be the corona health service and will just be there to pump oxygen into patients.""MPs speculate that there will be two big inquiries - an international one into the origins of the virus in China's live animal ""wet markets""; and a second into the government's preparations and policy decisions. ""If we end up like Italy in two weeks' time and 30-year-old doctors are dropping dead, the government is going to be in big trouble,"" a Labour MP said.SHAKING THE WORLD Amid the frenzy of events, more thoughtful Tories have concluded that the decisions taken last week will change three key aspects of the way the world works. One said: ""One is the debate around globalisation. Is Trump right that we just need to build bigger walls, or is Gordon Brown right that global problems need global solutions? The second is Socialism v The Free Market. Large parts of the economy are going to be socialised after this. I fear it leads to nationalists and socialists winning, to national socialism.""The third fissure may yet be the worst.""It's the intergenerational question. It is unsustainable to have people in their youth put their whole life on hold for months while the economy tanks to save a 91-year-old who would have died six months later anyway.""Whatever the outcome, ministers have little doubt about the significance of the virus. ""It's shaking the world,"" one said. Another, who has been up to his neck in the dramas of the past three years, was more prosaic: ""My obituary gets more interesting every week.""The sadness is that there will be many other obituaries to be written too.The PM was told: Now is the moment to actDon't tell people you're going into lockdown or they'll all be getting on the last helicopter out",Newspaper
190,190,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for ever;The inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","March 22, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),3037,3037,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,TIM SHIPMAN; CAROLINE WHEELER,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for everThe inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","There was a moment, when the decisions were made, when they wondered what on earth they had done, how far they had been forced to go. A moment when they sat ""shellshocked"", reflecting on choices that will change Britain for the rest of our lives. ""It took us the weekend to get ourselves into the emotional position where we were comfortable taking the decisions we took,"" a minister said. ""They were massive.""In politics, there is so much overstatement. Not this time. Ten days ago the government was slowly gearing up its response to the coronavirus crisis, downplaying the need for drastic measures. By Monday, Boris Johnson had ordered an expansion of the state not seen since the Second World War to save the National Health Service, an institution formed in the cauldron of that conflict. A wartimestyle lockdown of the capital was under active consideration.This weekend, the events of the last week have already changed health policy, changed the economy and are already changing the people involved.The last time the British state began a multiple service attack on a lurking enemy - D-Day in 1944 - it became known as The Longest Day. On Thursday one cabinet minister reflected: ""It feels like the longest week. It felt like Brexit was going to change the country but it is the coronavirus that will do that now.""Senior figures in government are insistent that the changes they made to the virus clampdown were not ""a U-turn"" but a vehicle accelerating faster along a track already laid. In truth, they no more resemble what went before than the space shuttle did a Citroën 2CV.Conversations with more than a dozen ministers and cabinet ministers, special advisers, Downing Street staff and civil servants reveal a human drama, of leaders tested as never before and of the single most frightening warning a British prime minister has received in eight decades.A SHOCK TO THE SYSTEM The meeting that will change British society for a generation took place on the evening of Thursday, March 12. That was when the strategic advisory group of experts (Sage in Whitehall parlance), the government's committee of scientists and medics, gathered to examine modelling from experts at Imperial College London and other institutions.The results were shattering. A week earlier, councils had been warned to expect about 100,000 deaths from Covid-19. Now Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, and Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, realised the estimates were wrong.""Unmitigated, the death number was 510,000,"" a senior figure said. ""Mitigated we were told it was going to be 250,000. Once you see a figure of take no further action and a quarter of a million people die, the question you ask is, 'What action?'"" Another insider said: ""There was a collision between the science and reality.""Ministers had been on notice that drastic action might be needed since the virus first emerged in China's Wuhan province in December. In January, Whitty told the cabinet: ""It either stays in China or it will get everywhere."" For two months the government had time to prepare, but Johnson's instincts were to resist a lifechanging crackdown. ""There was a lot of talk about how this was just a bit of flu,"" one senior Tory recalled.Dominic Cummings, the prime minister's senior aide, became convinced that Britain would be better able to resist a lethal second wave of the disease next winter if Whitty's prediction that 60% to 80% of the population became infected was right and the UK developed ""herd immunity"".At a private engagement at the end of February, Cummings outlined the government's strategy. Those present say it was ""herd immunity, protect the economy and if that means some pensioners die, too bad"".At the Sage meeting on March 12, a moment now dubbed the ""Domoscene conversion"", Cummings changed his mind. In this ""penny-drop moment"", he realised he had helped set a course for catastrophe. Until this point, the rise in British infections had been below the European average. Now they were above it and on course to emulate Italy, where the picture was bleak. A minister said: ""Seeing what was happening in Italy was the galvanising force across government.""By Friday the 13th, Cummings had become the most outspoken advocate of a tough crackdown. ""Dominic himself had a conversion,"" a senior Tory said. ""He's gone from 'herd immunity and let the old people die', to 'let's shut down the country and the economy.'"" Cummings had a ""meeting of minds"" with Matt Hancock, the health secretary, who wanted stronger action to prevent NHS hospitals being swamped. Department of Health officials had impressed on Hancock that the death rate in Wuhan province was 3.4% when the hospitals were overrun and 0.7% elsewhere in China.Johnson had also been queasy about the previous original approach. ""Boris hated the language of 'herd immunity' because it implied that it was OK for people to die,"" a senior source said. ""Matt hated the language because it implied we had given up. You've got to fight.""HERD IMMUNITY The problem for the government was that at the moment herd immunity was being banished from policy, it had become the focus of publicity. That Wednesday, David Halpern of the Whitehall ""nudge unit"" put the phrase in the public domain. On Friday the 13th, Vallance repeated the idea on Radio 4. With Italy, France and Spain going into lockdown, the government's critics accused Johnson of refusing to act because he wanted people to get ill.Insiders say it was ""very bumpy"" that Friday. ""The meetings were very messy,"" said one source. But when Johnson gathered his key advisers in the cabinet room at 9.15am last Saturday there was unanimity. Whitty and Vallance explained that Britain had been four weeks behind Italy ""and now we are closer"".The two experts, together with Hancock and Cummings, all delivered to Johnson one message: ""Now is the moment to act."" The prime minister agreed: ""We must work around the clock and take all necessary measures."" One of those present said: ""The mood in the room was astonishing. You could tell that something very significant had shifted.""Flesh was added to the bones in another crunch meeting in Downing Street on Sunday night and again in the 9.15am meetings and bilaterals between Johnson and key cabinet ministers throughout last week.The media was briefed that elderly and vulnerable people might have to self-isolate for a period of months and that everyone else would have to engage in ""social distancing"" - working from home, avoiding groups and unnecessary outings. Most significantly, without a gargantuan package of support for businesses, renters and the self-employed, millions of jobs would be lost and the economy would collapse.THE ECONOMIC RESPONSE On Tuesday morning, as he prepared to unveil details of Britain's biggest peacetime financial package, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, gathered his closest aides and officials in his book-lined study in 11 Downing Street. ""The scale of what is required is beyond anyone's current imagination,"" he said. ""We have to remove all limiting assumptions.""Over the weekend, Treasury officials worked through the night to prepare a package for business as if planning a full budget. ""They did three months' work in 48 hours,"" a Treasury source said. It helped that Charles Roxburgh, the second permanent secretary, and Andrew Bailey, the new governor of the Bank of England, were both veterans of the response to the 2008 financial crash.When he walked out with Johnson for a Downing Street news conference on Tuesday afternoon, aides were still finalising Sunak's comments as the statement came off the printer. The chancellor had no time to rehearse or to prepare for questions but gave an assured performance as he outlined plans for £350bn of government-backed loans and cash grants for business. ""We will do whatever it takes,"" he repeatedly intoned.Colleagues say Sunak's confidence came because he is deeply engaged ""in the weeds"" of the policy. ""Some ministers set the broad parameters for 15 minutes and the officials go away and do the work,"" said one source. ""He's more hands-on. He prefers a 30 to 40-minute meeting where he can properly kick the tyres and help solve the problems. He's across the detail.""Measures to help save jobs took longer, with a plan for the government to pay a high percentage of wages in cashstrapped firms finally being announced on Friday afternoon. Sunak agreed the package in a meeting with Johnson on Thursday night in which the pair shared a vegetarian takeaway pizza. The prime minister said: ""In 2008, the government looked after the bankers. Now we must make sure we look after the people first.""At 11.30pm the chancellor was sending messages to his permanent secretary thanking him for the ""superb"" work of some officials. A colleague said: ""He's got the brainpower. More importantly, he's got the character for this moment.""Sunak will need it because the risks are immense. One friend said: ""Rishi is very acutely aware that we are in danger of driving the economy off a cliff by shutting everything up. All this talk of bouncing straight back … we will have no airlines to bounce straight back with if we're not careful.""The prime minister's big decision on Wednesday was that schools would close on Friday, a decision arrived at with Gavin Williamson, the education secretary. They decided to act as many schools took matters into their own hands, to try to ensure childcare for key workers.It was another decision Johnson had resisted the week before, but cabinet ministers are clear that behind the scenes he has been far more decisive at crunch moments than his predecessor. ""He's been absolutely brilliant,"" said one. ""He makes decisions fast."" Another said: ""If Theresa May was still be in charge we would, by now, have just about signed off a request that people wash their hands."" Another cabinet source added: ""And if Philip Hammond was still chancellor he would have refused even to pay for that.""Nonetheless, even admirers admit that Johnson is not finding it easy to project the same decisiveness in his somewhat hesitant public appearances. ""He's a naturally cheerful person,"" one colleague said. ""He finds it difficult to deliver bad news."" Business leaders were surprised during a conference call on Monday, when he was trying to persuade them to build ventilators, to hear him describe the effort as ""Operation Last Gasp"".Whitty and Vallance began their own press conferences at the end of the week amid concern that some of Johnson's pronouncements - including a claim that they could ""turn the tide"" within 12 weeks - were not grounded in evidence. ""Some of the experts are appalled by some of his claims,"" a Whitehall source said. A Tory aide said: ""Boris looks haunted. It's like when George W Bush came in thinking he was going to be the education-reforming president and had to deal with the war on terror."" Another senior Tory said: ""Boris is shellshocked.""LOCKDOWN Johnson, who is a civil libertarian at heart, spent the week resisting Cummings's demands for a full-blown lockdown of London - banning inhabitants from travelling outside the city.Discussions about a shutdown were first aired at Cobra on Friday the 13th. By Tuesday the news was leaking after a Cabinet Office official emailed other departments to ask how a curfew might work. A Whitehall insider said: ""It was quickly established that the Paris model - with people being issued paperwork and allowed out of the family home one at a time would not work.""A senior Tory said: ""Boris really doesn't want to shut stuff down. He is more worried than most about the economic impact but also the social impact of locking people up in their homes for months. Fundamentally there is a Boris-Dom cleavage. First Boris bottled herd immunity. Now he's bottling lockdown.""Nonetheless, Johnson managed to fuel speculation that there would be troops on the streets and a travel ban by telling Wednesday's press conference that the government ""will not hesitate"" to take further steps. ""We live in a land of liberty,"" he said. ""But we will rule nothing out.""On Thursday the PM's spokesman was forced to say there were ""no plans"" to close down London transport and ""zero prospect"" of restrictions on travel. On Friday less draconian restrictions, closing pubs, clubs and restaurants nationwide, were unveiled. ""Whoever was briefing details of the full lockdown is bordering on a national security threat,"" said one Tory with links at the top of Whitehall. ""They are promulgating misinformation and spreading alarm."" Another source said the loose talk could have seen wealthy ""superspreaders"" flee London to infect people elsewhere: ""If you're going to do a lockdown you don't tell people first or you find they are all on the roof getting the last helicopter out of Saigon.""Nonetheless, Whitehall officials are quietly drawing up lists of key workers who would be issued with a travel permit if a full crackdown follows. Officials have also been working on a ""lockdown list"" of products that must be manufactured by law. They may yet be necessary. A minister said: ""We won't know for two weeks if the current measures are enough.""COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS On Thursday, after criticism from ministers and MPs that No 10 had failed to pro-vide clear messages to the public, Cummings and the communications director, Lee Cain, summoned the team who won the general election.Isaac Levido, the Tory campaign director, went to No 10, with former Vote Leave hands Paul Stephenson and Henry de Zoete on a video conference call. Together they devised a slogan ""Stay home. Save lives. Protect our NHS,"" which was rolled out on Friday.The No 10 morning meeting is now held on the Zoom video app to allow more home working. To try to raise morale, Johnson has also sent video messages thanking civil servants for their hard work. On Tuesday he returned from a morning run with his dog Dilyn to find his spokesman, James Slack, at the back of No 10 wishing his mother a happy birthday. Johnson took the phone and spoke to her for 10 minutes.However, many sources report that the Downing Street machine is fast running out of steam. ""Everyone is working to capacity and is absolutely exhausted,"" said one insider. ""It's utter chaos and there is no end in sight.""Businesses phoning up to offer help say Downing Street seems ""swamped"". One ventilator manufacturer claimed on Newsnight that the government had not put in any orders - though sources say 1,400 firms are offering to build them and by Friday morning eight companies who have never made a ventilator were turning them out.Some in Downing Street are turning to drink. An aide joked on Thursday that they had run out of hand sanitiser and were ""using the contents of a vodka miniature"" instead. Others are recruiting old friends. Gabriel Milland, a former head of press to Michael Gove, was drafted into No 10 last week. Tom Shinner, the civil servant who did the most to prepare Britain for a no-deal Brexit, who left the government last year, has also been rehired.MINISTERIAL INFIGHTING The toll is telling on ministers and tensions between them have bubbled over. ""It's miserable and horrible and you just have to get on with it,"" a cabinet minister said.The ""core four"" in all the key meetings are the chairmen of four inter-ministerial committees: Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, who chairs the international committee; Sunak, who chairs the economic committee; Hancock, who chairs the health committee; and Gove, who chairs the other public sector committee.Numerous sources say Gove has repeatedly sniped at Hancock. ""There have been tensions over where responsibilities begin and end,"" one observed. Some ministers are lobbying to see Gove take charge if Johnson is incapacitated with Covid-19 or if he takes paternity leave, though Sunak ranks higher in the cabinet rankings on the www.gov.uk website and the job is likely to be Raab's, since he is officially ""first secretary of state"".But a minister said: ""Considering the scale of the massive decisions we have been making it has been remarkably collegiate.""Ministers hope the dramatic events of the last week will reduce the likely death toll from Covid-19 to ""a bad seasonal flu"", which means tens, not hundreds, of thousands of deaths. The worst recent year was 2014-15 when 28,000 people died.But there are perils ahead. ""Boris and his team are absolutely terrified because it will not be the NHS by end of this,"" a Whitehall source said. ""It will be the corona health service and will just be there to pump oxygen into patients.""MPs speculate that there will be two big inquiries - an international one into the origins of the virus in China's live animal ""wet markets""; and a second into the government's preparations and policy decisions. ""If we end up like Italy in two weeks' time and 30-year-old doctors are dropping dead, the government is going to be in big trouble,"" a Labour MP said.SHAKING THE WORLD Amid the frenzy of events, more thoughtful Tories have concluded that the decisions taken last week will change three key aspects of the way the world works. One said: ""One is the debate around globalisation. Is Trump right that we just need to build bigger walls, or is Gordon Brown right that global problems need global solutions? The second is Socialism v The Free Market. Large parts of the economy are going to be socialised after this. I fear it leads to nationalists and socialists winning, to national socialism.""The third fissure may yet be the worst.""It's the intergenerational question. It is unsustainable to have people in their youth put their whole life on hold for months while the economy tanks to save a 91-year-old who would have died six months later anyway.""Whatever the outcome, ministers have little doubt about the significance of the virus. ""It's shaking the world,"" one said. Another, who has been up to his neck in the dramas of the past three years, was more prosaic: ""My obituary gets more interesting every week.""The sadness is that there will be many other obituaries to be written too.The PM was told: Now is the moment to actDon't tell people you're going into lockdown or they'll all be getting on the last helicopter out",Newspaper
191,191,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for ever;The inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","March 22, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),3038,3038,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,TIM SHIPMAN; CAROLINE WHEELER,"Ten days that shook Britain - and changed the nation for everThe inside story of how Boris Johnson changed his priorities: save lives first, and then salvage the economy","There was a moment, when the decisions were made, when they wondered what on earth they had done, how far they had been forced to go. A moment when they sat ""shellshocked"", reflecting on choices that will change Britain for the rest of our lives. ""It took us the weekend to get ourselves into the emotional position where we were comfortable taking the decisions we took,"" a minister said. ""They were massive.""In politics, there is so much overstatement. Not this time. Ten days ago the government was slowly gearing up its response to the coronavirus crisis, downplaying the need for drastic measures. By Monday, Boris Johnson had ordered an expansion of the state not seen since the Second World War to save the National Health Service, an institution formed in the cauldron of that conflict. A wartimestyle lockdown of the capital was under active consideration.This weekend, the events of the last week have already changed health policy, changed the economy and are already changing the people involved.The last time the British state began a multiple service attack on a lurking enemy - D-Day in 1944 - it became known as The Longest Day. On Thursday one cabinet minister reflected: ""It feels like the longest week. It felt like Brexit was going to change the country but it is the coronavirus that will do that now.""Senior figures in government are insistent that the changes they made to the virus clampdown were not ""a U-turn"" but a vehicle accelerating faster along a track already laid. In truth, they no more resemble what went before than the space shuttle did a Citroën 2CV.Conversations with more than a dozen ministers and cabinet ministers, special advisers, Downing Street staff and civil servants reveal a human drama, of leaders tested as never before and of the single most frightening warning a British prime minister has received in eight decades.A SHOCK TO THE SYSTEM The meeting that will change British society for a generation took place on the evening of Thursday, March 12. That was when the strategic advisory group of experts (Sage in Whitehall parlance), the government's committee of scientists and medics, gathered to examine modelling from experts at Imperial College London and other institutions.The results were shattering. A week earlier, councils had been warned to expect about 100,000 deaths from Covid-19. Now Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, and Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, realised the estimates were wrong.""Unmitigated, the death number was 510,000,"" a senior figure said. ""Mitigated we were told it was going to be 250,000. Once you see a figure of take no further action and a quarter of a million people die, the question you ask is, 'What action?'"" Another insider said: ""There was a collision between the science and reality.""Ministers had been on notice that drastic action might be needed since the virus first emerged in China's Wuhan province in December. In January, Whitty told the cabinet: ""It either stays in China or it will get everywhere."" For two months the government had time to prepare, but Johnson's instincts were to resist a lifechanging crackdown. ""There was a lot of talk about how this was just a bit of flu,"" one senior Tory recalled.Dominic Cummings, the prime minister's senior aide, became convinced that Britain would be better able to resist a lethal second wave of the disease next winter if Whitty's prediction that 60% to 80% of the population became infected was right and the UK developed ""herd immunity"".At a private engagement at the end of February, Cummings outlined the government's strategy. Those present say it was ""herd immunity, protect the economy and if that means some pensioners die, too bad"".At the Sage meeting on March 12, a moment now dubbed the ""Domoscene conversion"", Cummings changed his mind. In this ""penny-drop moment"", he realised he had helped set a course for catastrophe. Until this point, the rise in British infections had been below the European average. Now they were above it and on course to emulate Italy, where the picture was bleak. A minister said: ""Seeing what was happening in Italy was the galvanising force across government.""By Friday the 13th, Cummings had become the most outspoken advocate of a tough crackdown. ""Dominic himself had a conversion,"" a senior Tory said. ""He's gone from 'herd immunity and let the old people die', to 'let's shut down the country and the economy.'"" Cummings had a ""meeting of minds"" with Matt Hancock, the health secretary, who wanted stronger action to prevent NHS hospitals being swamped. Department of Health officials had impressed on Hancock that the death rate in Wuhan province was 3.4% when the hospitals were overrun and 0.7% elsewhere in China.Johnson had also been queasy about the previous original approach. ""Boris hated the language of 'herd immunity' because it implied that it was OK for people to die,"" a senior source said. ""Matt hated the language because it implied we had given up. You've got to fight.""HERD IMMUNITY The problem for the government was that at the moment herd immunity was being banished from policy, it had become the focus of publicity. That Wednesday, David Halpern of the Whitehall ""nudge unit"" put the phrase in the public domain. On Friday the 13th, Vallance repeated the idea on Radio 4. With Italy, France and Spain going into lockdown, the government's critics accused Johnson of refusing to act because he wanted people to get ill.Insiders say it was ""very bumpy"" that Friday. ""The meetings were very messy,"" said one source. But when Johnson gathered his key advisers in the cabinet room at 9.15am last Saturday there was unanimity. Whitty and Vallance explained that Britain had been four weeks behind Italy ""and now we are closer"".The two experts, together with Hancock and Cummings, all delivered to Johnson one message: ""Now is the moment to act."" The prime minister agreed: ""We must work around the clock and take all necessary measures."" One of those present said: ""The mood in the room was astonishing. You could tell that something very significant had shifted.""Flesh was added to the bones in another crunch meeting in Downing Street on Sunday night and again in the 9.15am meetings and bilaterals between Johnson and key cabinet ministers throughout last week.The media was briefed that elderly and vulnerable people might have to self-isolate for a period of months and that everyone else would have to engage in ""social distancing"" - working from home, avoiding groups and unnecessary outings. Most significantly, without a gargantuan package of support for businesses, renters and the self-employed, millions of jobs would be lost and the economy would collapse.THE ECONOMIC RESPONSE On Tuesday morning, as he prepared to unveil details of Britain's biggest peacetime financial package, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, gathered his closest aides and officials in his book-lined study in 11 Downing Street. ""The scale of what is required is beyond anyone's current imagination,"" he said. ""We have to remove all limiting assumptions.""Over the weekend, Treasury officials worked through the night to prepare a package for business as if planning a full budget. ""They did three months' work in 48 hours,"" a Treasury source said. It helped that Charles Roxburgh, the second permanent secretary, and Andrew Bailey, the new governor of the Bank of England, were both veterans of the response to the 2008 financial crash.When he walked out with Johnson for a Downing Street news conference on Tuesday afternoon, aides were still finalising Sunak's comments as the statement came off the printer. The chancellor had no time to rehearse or to prepare for questions but gave an assured performance as he outlined plans for £350bn of government-backed loans and cash grants for business. ""We will do whatever it takes,"" he repeatedly intoned.Colleagues say Sunak's confidence came because he is deeply engaged ""in the weeds"" of the policy. ""Some ministers set the broad parameters for 15 minutes and the officials go away and do the work,"" said one source. ""He's more hands-on. He prefers a 30 to 40-minute meeting where he can properly kick the tyres and help solve the problems. He's across the detail.""Measures to help save jobs took longer, with a plan for the government to pay a high percentage of wages in cashstrapped firms finally being announced on Friday afternoon. Sunak agreed the package in a meeting with Johnson on Thursday night in which the pair shared a vegetarian takeaway pizza. The prime minister said: ""In 2008, the government looked after the bankers. Now we must make sure we look after the people first.""At 11.30pm the chancellor was sending messages to his permanent secretary thanking him for the ""superb"" work of some officials. A colleague said: ""He's got the brainpower. More importantly, he's got the character for this moment.""Sunak will need it because the risks are immense. One friend said: ""Rishi is very acutely aware that we are in danger of driving the economy off a cliff by shutting everything up. All this talk of bouncing straight back … we will have no airlines to bounce straight back with if we're not careful.""The prime minister's big decision on Wednesday was that schools would close on Friday, a decision arrived at with Gavin Williamson, the education secretary. They decided to act as many schools took matters into their own hands, to try to ensure childcare for key workers.It was another decision Johnson had resisted the week before, but cabinet ministers are clear that behind the scenes he has been far more decisive at crunch moments than his predecessor. ""He's been absolutely brilliant,"" said one. ""He makes decisions fast."" Another said: ""If Theresa May was still be in charge we would, by now, have just about signed off a request that people wash their hands."" Another cabinet source added: ""And if Philip Hammond was still chancellor he would have refused even to pay for that.""Nonetheless, even admirers admit that Johnson is not finding it easy to project the same decisiveness in his somewhat hesitant public appearances. ""He's a naturally cheerful person,"" one colleague said. ""He finds it difficult to deliver bad news."" Business leaders were surprised during a conference call on Monday, when he was trying to persuade them to build ventilators, to hear him describe the effort as ""Operation Last Gasp"".Whitty and Vallance began their own press conferences at the end of the week amid concern that some of Johnson's pronouncements - including a claim that they could ""turn the tide"" within 12 weeks - were not grounded in evidence. ""Some of the experts are appalled by some of his claims,"" a Whitehall source said. A Tory aide said: ""Boris looks haunted. It's like when George W Bush came in thinking he was going to be the education-reforming president and had to deal with the war on terror."" Another senior Tory said: ""Boris is shellshocked.""LOCKDOWN Johnson, who is a civil libertarian at heart, spent the week resisting Cummings's demands for a full-blown lockdown of London - banning inhabitants from travelling outside the city.Discussions about a shutdown were first aired at Cobra on Friday, March 13. By Tuesday the news was leaking after a Cabinet Office official emailed other departments to ask how a curfew might work. A Whitehall insider said: ""It was quickly established that the Paris model - with people being issued paperwork and allowed out of the family home one at a time would not work.""A senior Tory said: ""Boris really doesn't want to shut stuff down. He is more worried than most about the economic impact but also the social impact of locking people up in their homes for months. Fundamentally there is a Boris-Dom cleavage. First Boris bottled herd immunity. Now he's bottling lockdown.""Nonetheless, Johnson managed to fuel speculation that there would be troops on the streets and a travel ban by telling Wednesday's press conference that the government ""will not hesitate"" to take further steps. ""We live in a land of liberty,"" he said. ""But we will rule nothing out.""On Thursday the PM's spokesman was forced to say there were ""no plans"" to close down London transport and ""zero prospect"" of restrictions on travel. On Friday less draconian restrictions, closing pubs, clubs and restaurants nationwide, were unveiled. ""Whoever was briefing details of the full lockdown is bordering on a national security threat,"" said one Tory with links at the top of Whitehall. ""They are promulgating misinformation and spreading alarm."" Another source said the loose talk could have seen wealthy ""superspreaders"" flee London to infect people elsewhere: ""If you're going to do a lockdown you don't tell people first or you find they are all on the roof getting the last helicopter out of Saigon.""Nonetheless, Whitehall officials are quietly drawing up lists of key workers who would be issued with a travel permit if a full crackdown follows. Officials have also been working on a ""lockdown list"" of products that must be manufactured by law. They may yet be necessary. A minister said: ""We won't know for two weeks if the current measures are enough.""COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS On Thursday, after criticism from ministers and MPs that No 10 had failed to pro-vide clear messages to the public, Cummings and the communications director, Lee Cain, summoned the team who won the general election.Isaac Levido, the Tory campaign director, went to No 10, with former Vote Leave hands Paul Stephenson and Henry de Zoete on a video conference call. Together they devised a slogan ""Stay home. Save lives. Protect our NHS,"" which was rolled out on Friday.The No 10 morning meeting is now held on the Zoom video app to allow more home working. To try to raise morale, Johnson has also sent video messages thanking civil servants for their hard work. On Tuesday he returned from a morning run with his dog Dilyn to find his spokesman, James Slack, at the back of No 10 wishing his mother a happy birthday. Johnson took the phone and spoke to her for 10 minutes.However, many sources report that the Downing Street machine is fast running out of steam. ""Everyone is working to capacity and is absolutely exhausted,"" said one insider. ""It's utter chaos and there is no end in sight.""Businesses phoning up to offer help say Downing Street seems ""swamped"". One ventilator manufacturer claimed on Newsnight that the government had not put in any orders - though sources say 1,400 firms are offering to build them and by Friday morning eight companies who have never made a ventilator were turning them out.Some in Downing Street are turning to drink. An aide joked on Thursday that they had run out of hand sanitiser and were ""using the contents of a vodka miniature"" instead. Others are recruiting old friends. Gabriel Milland, a former head of press to Michael Gove, was drafted into No 10 last week. Tom Shinner, the civil servant who did the most to prepare Britain for a no-deal Brexit, who left the government last year, has also been rehired.MINISTERIAL INFIGHTING The toll is telling on ministers and tensions between them have bubbled over. ""It's miserable and horrible and you just have to get on with it,"" a cabinet minister said.The ""core four"" in all the key meetings are the chairmen of four inter-ministerial committees: Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, who chairs the international committee; Sunak, who chairs the economic committee; Hancock, who chairs the health committee; and Gove, who chairs the other public sector committee.Numerous sources say Gove has repeatedly sniped at Hancock. ""There have been tensions over where responsibilities begin and end,"" one observed. Some ministers are lobbying to see Gove take charge if Johnson is incapacitated with Covid-19 or if he takes paternity leave, though Sunak ranks higher in the cabinet rankings on the www.gov.uk website and the job is likely to be Raab's, since he is officially ""first secretary of state"".But a minister said: ""Considering the scale of the massive decisions we have been making it has been remarkably collegiate.""Ministers hope the dramatic events of the last week will reduce the likely death toll from Covid-19 to ""a bad seasonal flu"", which means tens, not hundreds, of thousands of deaths. The worst recent year was 2014-15 when 28,000 people died.But there are perils ahead. ""Boris and his team are absolutely terrified because it will not be the NHS by end of this,"" a Whitehall source said. ""It will be the corona health service and will just be there to pump oxygen into patients.""MPs speculate that there will be two big inquiries - an international one into the origins of the virus in China's live animal ""wet markets""; and a second into the government's preparations and policy decisions. ""If we end up like Italy in two weeks' time and 30-year-old doctors are dropping dead, the government is going to be in big trouble,"" a Labour MP said.SHAKING THE WORLD Amid the frenzy of events, more thoughtful Tories have concluded that the decisions taken last week will change three key aspects of the way the world works. One said: ""One is the debate around globalisation. Is Trump right that we just need to build bigger walls, or is Gordon Brown right that global problems need global solutions? The second is Socialism v The Free Market. Large parts of the economy are going to be socialised after this. I fear it leads to nationalists and socialists winning, to national socialism.""The third fissure may yet be the worst.""It's the intergenerational question. It is unsustainable to have people in their youth put their whole life on hold for months while the economy tanks to save a 91-year-old who would have died six months later anyway.""Whatever the outcome, ministers have little doubt about the significance of the virus. ""It's shaking the world,"" one said. Another, who has been up to his neck in the dramas of the past three years, was more prosaic: ""My obituary gets more interesting every week.""The sadness is that there will be many other obituaries to be written too.The PM was told: Now is the moment to actDon't tell people you're going into lockdown or they'll all be getting on the last helicopter out",Newspaper
203,203,Expertise must be married up across all disciplines;Letters,"March 24, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",138,138,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Expertise must be married up across all disciplinesLetters,"Chris Giles is spot on (""Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists"", March 20). It is nice to get some support for economics after the recent spate of comments in this paper about economists being worse than weather forecasters and akin to astrologers.Economists learnt from their failings during the financial crisis and have taken lessons from other disciplines in very useful ways. Most importantly, they have been able to draw on psychology and sociology in the further development of behavioural economics and have learnt to better factor in uncertainty and risk into their policy advice.Pace Michael Gove, experts are needed to advise governments, but their expertise must be married up across disciplines in order to avoid tunnel vision and simple answers to ultimately complex questions. Andrew Dean Paris, France",Newspaper
204,204,Expertise must be married up across all disciplines;Letters,"March 24, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",138,138,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Expertise must be married up across all disciplinesLetters,"Chris Giles is spot on (""Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists"", March 20). It is nice to get some support for economics after the recent spate of comments in this paper about economists being worse than weather forecasters and akin to astrologers.Economists learnt from their failings during the financial crisis and have taken lessons from other disciplines in very useful ways. Most importantly, they have been able to draw on psychology and sociology in the further development of behavioural economics and have learnt to better factor in uncertainty and risk into their policy advice.Pace Michael Gove, experts are needed to advise governments, but their expertise must be married up across disciplines in order to avoid tunnel vision and simple answers to ultimately complex questions. Andrew Dean Paris, France",Newspaper
205,205,Expertise must be married up across all disciplines;Letters,"March 24, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",138,138,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Expertise must be married up across all disciplinesLetters,"Chris Giles is spot on (""Scientists can learn vital lessons from economists"", March 20). It is nice to get some support for economics after the recent spate of comments in this paper about economists being worse than weather forecasters and akin to astrologers.Economists learnt from their failings during the financial crisis and have taken lessons from other disciplines in very useful ways. Most importantly, they have been able to draw on psychology and sociology in the further development of behavioural economics and have learnt to better factor in uncertainty and risk into their policy advice.Pace Michael Gove, experts are needed to advise governments, but their expertise must be married up across disciplines in order to avoid tunnel vision and simple answers to ultimately complex questions. Andrew Dean Paris, France",Newspaper
207,207,IN THE TIMES TOMORROW,"March 24, 2020 Tuesday",International,The Times (London),48,48,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,IN THE TIMES TOMORROW,COMMENTDANIEL FINKELSTEIN Is behavioural science to blame for public ignorance? MAIN PAPERBUSINESSDAVID SMITH This is the genuine black swan event that we all dreaded MAIN PAPERFASHIONANNA MURPHY Time to get casual PULLOUTSPORTBROUGH SCOTT The greatest flat-race horse in history MAIN PAPER,Newspaper
208,208,IN THE TIMES TOMORROW,"March 24, 2020 Tuesday",International,The Times (London),47,47,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,IN THE TIMES TOMORROW,COMMENTDANIEL FINKELSTEINIs behavioural science to blame for public ignorance?MAIN PAPERBUSINESSDAVID SMITHThis is the genuine black swan event that we all dreadedMAIN PAPERFASHIONANNA MURPHYTime to get casualPULLOUTSPORTBROUGH SCOTTThe greatest flat-race horse in historyMAIN PAPER,Newspaper
209,209,"Nudging people to do the right thing works;The suspicion that government has too much faith in behavioural science is wrong - if anything, it's being underused","March 25, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),1144,1144,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Daniel Finkelstein,"Nudging people to do the right thing worksThe suspicion that government has too much faith in behavioural science is wrong - if anything, it's being underused","Earlier this week Scientific American published an arresting new discovery by a group of social psychologists who had been responsible for a landmark finding in 2012. One that had been cited hundreds of times since it first appeared in a prestigious peer-reviewed journal.Unfortunately, the new discovery was that their original finding had been wrong. The 2012 publication had suggested that if you got people to sign a pledge to tell the truth before filling in a form - tax, say, or insurance - they would be more truthful than if they signed such a declaration at the end. This was plausible and experiments seemed to confirm it.Then an odd thing happened. Governments all over the world tried using the insight and spent a lot of money on it, too. But it didn't work. When the authors returned to their study to figure out why, they realised that with a larger sample and more rigorous methods, the effect of signing an advance pledge disappeared.It's an interesting moment to have recanted. It comes at a time when people are worried that Britain might have delayed reacting to Covid-19 because of meddling behavioural scientists. Voodoo about ""nudges"" and ""compliance fatigue"" may have outweighed the instincts of ""proper"" epidemiologists. The behavioural people may have made Boris Johnson wait instead of acting, advising him that people wouldn't stick a rigorous policy for long, so he shouldn't start too early. And because we paused, people are going to die who needn't have done. These same behavioural insight folk might be involved in the next calculation: when and how do we relax the restrictions? All this as Scientific American is revealing yet another failure in behavioural science. Can we really rely on these people? The latest revelation of flaws in behavioural science is just that: the latest revelation. Because we already know there are big problems with some of the most famous pieces of behavioural research. The infamous Stanford experiment, say, with the prison guards who turn nasty, or the one with the phoney electric shocks that people are willing to impose are well known, but with the passage of time it's obvious that the methods were flawed and the sample size much too small.So the concern that we have been allowing bogus science to distort what should have been purely medically-driven models is understandable. But it's wrong. If anything, we have been underusing behavioural science, not overusing it. We should be taking it more seriously, not less.The central charge against the behavioural scientists advising the government is untrue. This country has not delayed measures on advice from behavioural scientists that people will get fed up with restrictions and stop complying with them just as we would otherwise reach the peak of contagion.Much of the advice to ministers has been made public. The epidemiological models include many assumptions about how people will behave but they aren't ones that come from behavioural scientists.Some of them are best guesses by epidemiologists and stem from that essential but dangerous thing, common sense. Eventually, common sense tell us, people will get fed up isolating themselves and will stop playing ball (or maybe resume playing ball). This may or may not be reasonable or have led to dangerous delay, but it isn't behavioural science.Apart from anything else, the scientific evidence on compliance fatigue is inconsistent. There have been several studies on compliance that suggest people do indeed flag after a while. In the 2009 H1N1 flu outbreak in Mexico, researchers used TV viewing as a proxy for staying at home. It increased massively and then fell, and the less time spent viewing, the higher the infection rate. However, in the Netherlands the use of preventative measures was sustained, while in China it actually rose with time. As the UCL psychologist Vaughan Bell concludes, the lesson is ""for scientists to be cautious when taking public positions"".Yet there are plenty of behavioural insights that are robust and can help us in lockdown and as we emerge from it. We are using some already. Getting people to sing Happy Birthday twice as a way of hand washing properly is a classic behavioural intervention. As is getting sanitisers put in prominent positions. But we could be doing more.We should, for example, emphasise the number of people who are complying with restrictions and not the people who aren't. Social media is full of pictures of people who are failing to keep their distance. Yet the more we suggest such dangerous behaviour is common, the more common it will be. The evidence on this is overwhelming. We copy each other. Warning everyone that all their neighbours are stockpiling lavatory paper doesn't make people feel guilty. It makes them go out and buy more lavatory paper.The government and private individuals should be stressing the extraordinary amount of compliance, not the occasional failure. The empty streets, the responsible people exercising far apart from each other, the proportion of us using apps like Zoom. Anything that shows just how successful we are at this distancing malarkey. Everyone else is doing it and if you don't, you are the odd one out. That should be the message.There are other things we know that work. Personalisation, for instance. The behavioural insights team established by David Cameron under David Halpern (who is still advising the government) had success with this, getting people to fill in tax forms and pay fines by using the recipient's name prominently. So if we used emails, texts and other means employing, for instance, the first name of the person receiving it and other details, it would add significantly to the impact of advice coming from conventional media.Steve Martin, a behavioural scientist who with Joe Marks wrote the recent book Messengers, also questions whether merely using authority figures - the chief medical officer, the prime minister - to deliver the message is enough. There is plenty of research that shows the importance of ""likeness"", that people are influenced by others ""like them"". Yet a proper public awareness campaign using such figures has been notably absent.And most importantly there is a vast literature on how we form new habits, overcome loneliness and ensure we keep a sense of rhythm and purpose. Purpose and being engrossed in what we do is core to being happy. We aren't going to stay locked down for ever. And the chances are that when we are free to go out again, we will still need to keep our behaviour in check. As Mr Johnson said a few days ago: ""It is a very considerable psychological, behavioural change that we're asking you, we're asking the public, the nation to do."" There is science, and there are scientists, that can help.daniel.finkelstein@thetimes.co.ukWarn about stockpiling lavatory paper and you make people buy more",Newspaper
210,210,"Nudging people to do the right thing works;The suspicion that government has too much faith in behavioural science is wrong - if anything, it's being underused","March 25, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),1144,1144,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Daniel Finkelstein,"Nudging people to do the right thing worksThe suspicion that government has too much faith in behavioural science is wrong - if anything, it's being underused","Earlier this week Scientific American published an arresting new discovery by a group of social psychologists who had been responsible for a landmark finding in 2012. One that had been cited hundreds of times since it first appeared in a prestigious peer-reviewed journal.Unfortunately, the new discovery was that their original finding had been wrong. The 2012 publication had suggested that if you got people to sign a pledge to tell the truth before filling in a form - tax, say, or insurance - they would be more truthful than if they signed such a declaration at the end. This was plausible and experiments seemed to confirm it.Then an odd thing happened. Governments all over the world tried using the insight and spent a lot of money on it, too. But it didn't work. When the authors returned to their study to figure out why, they realised that with a larger sample and more rigorous methods, the effect of signing an advance pledge disappeared.It's an interesting moment to have recanted. It comes at a time when people are worried that Britain might have delayed reacting to Covid-19 because of meddling behavioural scientists. Voodoo about ""nudges"" and ""compliance fatigue"" may have outweighed the instincts of ""proper"" epidemiologists. The behavioural people may have made Boris Johnson wait instead of acting, advising him that people wouldn't stick a rigorous policy for long, so he shouldn't start too early. And because we paused, people are going to die who needn't have done. These same behavioural insight folk might be involved in the next calculation: when and how do we relax the restrictions? All this as Scientific American is revealing yet another failure in behavioural science. Can we really rely on these people? The latest revelation of flaws in behavioural science is just that: the latest revelation. Because we already know there are big problems with some of the most famous pieces of behavioural research. The infamous Stanford experiment, say, with the prison guards who turn nasty, or the one with the phoney electric shocks that people are willing to impose are well known, but with the passage of time it's obvious that the methods were flawed and the sample size much too small.So the concern that we have been allowing bogus science to distort what should have been purely medically-driven models is understandable. But it's wrong. If anything, we have been underusing behavioural science, not overusing it. We should be taking it more seriously, not less.The central charge against the behavioural scientists advising the government is untrue. This country has not delayed measures on advice from behavioural scientists that people will get fed up with restrictions and stop complying with them just as we would otherwise reach the peak of contagion.Much of the advice to ministers has been made public. The epidemiological models include many assumptions about how people will behave but they aren't ones that come from behavioural scientists.Some of them are best guesses by epidemiologists and stem from that essential but dangerous thing, common sense. Eventually, common sense tell us, people will get fed up isolating themselves and will stop playing ball (or maybe resume playing ball). This may or may not be reasonable or have led to dangerous delay, but it isn't behavioural science.Apart from anything else, the scientific evidence on compliance fatigue is inconsistent. There have been several studies on compliance that suggest people do indeed flag after a while. In the 2009 H1N1 flu outbreak in Mexico, researchers used TV viewing as a proxy for staying at home. It increased massively and then fell, and the less time spent viewing, the higher the infection rate. However, in the Netherlands the use of preventative measures was sustained, while in China it actually rose with time. As the UCL psychologist Vaughan Bell concludes, the lesson is ""for scientists to be cautious when taking public positions"".Yet there are plenty of behavioural insights that are robust and can help us in lockdown and as we emerge from it. We are using some already. Getting people to sing Happy Birthday twice as a way of hand washing properly is a classic behavioural intervention. As is getting sanitisers put in prominent positions. But we could be doing more.We should, for example, emphasise the number of people who are complying with restrictions and not the people who aren't. Social media is full of pictures of people who are failing to keep their distance. Yet the more we suggest such dangerous behaviour is common, the more common it will be. The evidence on this is overwhelming. We copy each other. Warning everyone that all their neighbours are stockpiling lavatory paper doesn't make people feel guilty. It makes them go out and buy more lavatory paper.The government and private individuals should be stressing the extraordinary amount of compliance, not the occasional failure. The empty streets, the responsible people exercising far apart from each other, the proportion of us using apps like Zoom. Anything that shows just how successful we are at this distancing malarkey. Everyone else is doing it and if you don't, you are the odd one out. That should be the message.There are other things we know that work. Personalisation, for instance. The behavioural insights team established by David Cameron under David Halpern (who is still advising the government) had success with this, getting people to fill in tax forms and pay fines by using the recipient's name prominently. So if we used emails, texts and other means employing, for instance, the first name of the person receiving it and other details, it would add significantly to the impact of advice coming from conventional media.Steve Martin, a behavioural scientist who with Joe Marks wrote the recent book Messengers, also questions whether merely using authority figures - the chief medical officer, the prime minister - to deliver the message is enough. There is plenty of research that shows the importance of ""likeness"", that people are influenced by others ""like them"". Yet a proper public awareness campaign using such figures has been notably absent.And most importantly there is a vast literature on how we form new habits, overcome loneliness and ensure we keep a sense of rhythm and purpose. Purpose and being engrossed in what we do is core to being happy. We aren't going to stay locked down for ever. And the chances are that when we are free to go out again, we will still need to keep our behaviour in check. As Mr Johnson said a few days ago: ""It is a very considerable psychological, behavioural change that we're asking you, we're asking the public, the nation to do."" There is science, and there are scientists, that can help.daniel.finkelstein@thetimes.co.ukWarn about stockpiling lavatory paper and you make people buy more",Newspaper
218,218,Nudging behaviour;Letters to the Editor,"March 27, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),103,103,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Nudging behaviourLetters to the Editor,"Sir, As a behavioural scientist I largely agree with Daniel Finkelstein (""Nudging people to do the right thing works"", Mar 25) but there are some basic communication skills that the government has failed to use.Where, for example, are the visual aids? In his address to the nation, instead of talking at us about the need to stay at home, the prime minister could easily have used a simple diagram to show how just one person failing to practise social distancing spreads the virus. I hate to admit it, but we don't need behavioural scientists to remind us that a picture is worth a thousand words.Dr Peter Honey London SE1",Newspaper
222,222,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","March 27, 2020 Friday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1241,1241,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","On Monday evening, Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Prof Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released last week, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Prof Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next three weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProf Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage being that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""There are also hints that countries in Europe may be on a slightly faster course than China, and may peak sooner, meaning restrictions could be lifted earlier. While cases in China peaked some 72 days after the first recorded infections, public health officials in both Germany and Italy believe that they are starting to see a plateauing now, which could mean a peak of around 57 and 53 days respectively.Earlier this week, the Prime Minister said that we are two weeks behind Italy so Britain may end up peaking by the beginning of April. China left lockdown restrictions in place for nearly a month after the peak, so it is possible restrictions could be lifted early in May.Prof Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming days and weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures which will inform how long they remain in place. She said: ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual actual toll which the epidemic is exacting""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing, for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an 'epidemic of action', and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Prof Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish: they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
227,227,Viruses and the social instinct;Covid-19 needs human contact to flourish. Can its spread be slowed with the help of behavioural science? Anjana Ahuja reports,"March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",1610,1610,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Viruses and the social instinctCovid-19 needs human contact to flourish. Can its spread be slowed with the help of behavioural science? Anjana Ahuja reports,"T he sculpture, by renowned Indian sand artist Sudarsan Pattnaik, depicts a row of five health workers wearing face masks and staring at the viewer. The message underneath is simple and shaming: ""I stayed at work for you. You stay at home for us.""That slogan in silica captured the frustration felt by many on the front line against Covid-19. Sars-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes it, is now on the rampage across the globe, partly sustained and amplified by human behaviour at every level.On an individual basis, we continued to commute to work, to socialise in bars and restaurants, and traipse to theatres and museums, even after health experts and politicians, alarmed by the crises unfolding in other countries, asked us not to. Back then, it seemed less disruptive to continue life as we knew it: we discounted the future and hoped the virus would burn itself out before reaching our doorstep.We have run out of doorsteps and the consequences are devastating beyond comprehension. The world changes day by day, hour by hour. On Tuesday, the UK, like so many other countries before it, began life under lockdown.Why did people flout social distancing advice? The coronavirus, suggests Professor Robin Dunbar, an evolutionary psychologist at Oxford university, exploits instinctive behavioural shortcuts long practised by our species. For most of our history, survival depended on being a member of a group. ""We are primates - the whole evolutionary strategy of primates is our intense sociality,"" he told me. ""So, it doesn't surprise me that teens and young people were still rushing out. It takes a very long time, perhaps 25 years, to learn about the implications of your behaviour."" The young might also have felt invincible: hospital statistics suggest that children and young adults are largely unaffected, a morsel of consolation amid the panic.Discounting the future can also be a survival instinct, Dunbar points out. Why worry about what lies over the horizon, our ancestors reasoned, when the only thing that matters is today? If we do not survive today, there can be no tomorrow. Covid-19 has prospered in the wake of these behavioural calculations. We need to rethink how to manage our lives in a world of contagion.When I wrote in early January about a mystery pneumonia from China, never did I foresee it metastasising into the Big One, a pandemic to rival the 1918 Spanish flu.Humans have no immunity to novel viruses; we are all ""immunologically naive"", meaning we can all be infected. That is an unfamiliar situation, particularly for those of us in the global north. Most contagious childhood diseases such as measles have been vaccinated away; seasonal flu vaccines offer protection against an annual foe.It is no longer infectious diseases that dominate the health agenda but noncommunicable diseases like heart disease, type 2 diabetes and cancer. Noncommunicable diseases account for 71 per cent of global deaths annually and demand individual, not collective, choices: should I give up smoking? Should I hit the gym or the doughnuts? The risks and benefits are mine alone.Covid-19 demands a different reckoning: the welfare of the collective versus the cost to the individual. You can be infected and transmit the virus without knowing it. According to the WHO, the case fatality ratio (number of deaths divided by number of reported cases) is about 3-4 per cent, with older people and those with underlying health conditions most vulnerable. Your individual chance of dying might be low but the risk to your contacts might be high. That is why social distancing measures are meant to apply to everyone.The way an infectious disease spreads depends on its ""reproduction number"", known as R. This is the average number of contacts to whom an infectious person transmits the disease. If R is below one, it will peter out; above one means it will spread. For seasonal flu, R is around 1.3. For Covid-19, R hovers somewhere between 2 and 3.That one-digit difference is not mathematically, or epidemiologically, trivial. With an R of 2, the number of people infected at each link in the transmission chain doubles. The fifth generation will comprise 32 new cases. If R is 3, the number of new infections triples rather than doubles at every stage. In this scenario, the fifth generation alone numbers 243 new cases. That is why, across countries, the numbers of Covid-19 cases, when plotted against time, show such a steep rise after a few weeks.Now the good news: R is not set in stone. As British epidemiologist Adam Kucharski explains in The Rules of Contagion, there are four factors that feed into R: the duration for which a person is infectious; the number of spreading opportunities per day during that infectious period; the probability that an opportunity leads to transmission; and the susceptibility of the population. ""Breaking the reproduction number down ... can help us work out the best way to control an epidemic,"" writes Kucharski, a member of a modelling team at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, which is advising the UK government on its Covid-19 response. He calls this the DOTS rule: duration, opportunities, transmission and susceptibility. Some of the dots can be massaged downwards. A vaccine is the best way to cut susceptibility - but none for Covid-19 is likely to exist within a year. Other ways to cut R entail reducing both spreading opportunities and the chances of transmission occurring during those opportunities. Those basic ambitions lie at the heart of the unprecedented social and economic shutdowns. Minimising the frequency and length of social interactions starves the virus of the very thing it needs to propagate: human contact. It also slows the spread, allowing the healthcare burden to be spaced out.Danger may come, however, when restrictions are later lifted, especially if there is no vaccine or treatment. Further waves of infections can hit once people, and viruses, start moving around again; this appears to be happening in Hong Kong.It is possible, though not guaranteed, that survivors of the first Covid-19 wave will be immune if a second pulsates around the globe. With serological testing for Covid-19 antibodies - those who have had the virus will carry these, like biological battle scars - and careful society-wide orchestration, any subsequent attempt at suppressing the virus might need not be so disruptive.But these are just hunches; we are in unknown territory. That makes the Covid-19 emergency the mother of all risk-management problems, according to Gilberto Montibeller, professor of management science at Loughborough University.""The disease transmission models are not enough,"" says Montibeller. ""Epidemiologists have been driving policy, which is great, but we need to know other impacts beyond the number of people infected and the care they need. There is a lot of science, such as risk analysis, that hasn't been included in this debate. We also need more understanding of individual behaviour and group behaviour in a pandemic scenario. It's not just about mitigating risk but managing perceived risk too.""Soliciting these insights, Montibeller suggests, might have anticipated the panic-buying seen in several countries. That reaction was predictable, he says, given that the virus is a perfect toxic storm of the dreadful and the unknown.The behavioural science used to inform the UK government's response - trying to ""nudge"" people into staying at home - was also misjudged. ""Nudging wasn't created for these kinds of health threats and it isn't suitable here. Companies and governments now need to raise the quality of decision-making in this very difficult scenario.""""  In terms of shutting down epidemics, the west must look tousan countries, which remembered the lessons from Sars. Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea saw their commitment to surveillance, testing and contact tracing rewarded with flatter curves and fewer Covid-19 deaths. Restarting their economies may be a smoother task, since people will know, through testing, whether they have had the disease. New, accelerated ways of developing, testing and manufacturing vaccines will also be an urgent priority; the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, formed in response to the Ebola outbreak, deserves credit for pushing this agenda as an economic imperative.The real and perceived threat of the Covid-19 virus to our future is clearly sky-high. It is an unfamiliar, lethal pathogen with no vaccine, no cure, not even a clear picture as to whether a person can be infected twice. Like all viruses, it mutates as it circulates. It is an invisible enemy in perpetual motion.There are reasons to be optimistic: the race for a vaccine has started, and last week WHO announced a global, nofrills ""mega-trial"" to see if existing drugs could be repurposed to treat Covid-19.But we do not have the upper hand yet. Dr Mike Ryan, who leads WHO's global Covid-19 containment efforts and captained its Ebola response, watched for weeks as Europe, now in the eye of the viral storm, discounted the future and maintained business as usual.At a memorable press conference on March 13, he reminded countries that inertia would be punished. ""Be fast, have no regrets; you must be the first mover,"" he commanded, in a video that itself went viral. ""The virus will always get you if you don't move quickly ... [and] if you need to be right before you move, you will never win.""Panic-buying was predictable, given the virus was a perfect storm of the dreadful and the unknownThe virus, suggests Prof Dunbar, exploits instinctive behavioural shortcuts long practised by our species",Newspaper
228,228,Viruses and the social instinct;Covid-19 needs human contact to flourish. Can its spread be slowed with the help of behavioural science? Anjana Ahuja reports,"March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",1610,1610,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Viruses and the social instinctCovid-19 needs human contact to flourish. Can its spread be slowed with the help of behavioural science? Anjana Ahuja reports,"T he sculpture, by renowned Indian sand artist Sudarsan Pattnaik, depicts a row of five health workers wearing face masks and staring at the viewer. The message underneath is simple and shaming: ""I stayed at work for you. You stay at home for us.""That slogan in silica captured the frustration felt by many on the front line against Covid-19. Sars-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes it, is now on the rampage across the globe, partly sustained and amplified by human behaviour at every level.On an individual basis, we continued to commute to work, to socialise in bars and restaurants, and traipse to theatres and museums, even after health experts and politicians, alarmed by the crises unfolding in other countries, asked us not to. Back then, it seemed less disruptive to continue life as we knew it: we discounted the future and hoped the virus would burn itself out before reaching our doorstep.We have run out of doorsteps and the consequences are devastating beyond comprehension. The world changes day by day, hour by hour. On Tuesday, the UK, like so many other countries before it, began life under lockdown.Why did people flout social distancing advice? The coronavirus, suggests Professor Robin Dunbar, an evolutionary psychologist at Oxford university, exploits instinctive behavioural shortcuts long practised by our species. For most of our history, survival depended on being a member of a group. ""We are primates - the whole evolutionary strategy of primates is our intense sociality,"" he told me. ""So, it doesn't surprise me that teens and young people were still rushing out. It takes a very long time, perhaps 25 years, to learn about the implications of your behaviour."" The young might also have felt invincible: hospital statistics suggest that children and young adults are largely unaffected, a morsel of consolation amid the panic.Discounting the future can also be a survival instinct, Dunbar points out. Why worry about what lies over the horizon, our ancestors reasoned, when the only thing that matters is today? If we do not survive today, there can be no tomorrow. Covid-19 has prospered in the wake of these behavioural calculations. We need to rethink how to manage our lives in a world of contagion.When I wrote in early January about a mystery pneumonia from China, never did I foresee it metastasising into the Big One, a pandemic to rival the 1918 Spanish flu.Humans have no immunity to novel viruses; we are all ""immunologically naive"", meaning we can all be infected. That is an unfamiliar situation, particularly for those of us in the global north. Most contagious childhood diseases such as measles have been vaccinated away; seasonal flu vaccines offer protection against an annual foe.It is no longer infectious diseases that dominate the health agenda but noncommunicable diseases like heart disease, type 2 diabetes and cancer. Noncommunicable diseases account for 71 per cent of global deaths annually and demand individual, not collective, choices: should I give up smoking? Should I hit the gym or the doughnuts? The risks and benefits are mine alone.Covid-19 demands a different reckoning: the welfare of the collective versus the cost to the individual. You can be infected and transmit the virus without knowing it. According to the WHO, the case fatality ratio (number of deaths divided by number of reported cases) is about 3-4 per cent, with older people and those with underlying health conditions most vulnerable. Your individual chance of dying might be low but the risk to your contacts might be high. That is why social distancing measures are meant to apply to everyone.The way an infectious disease spreads depends on its ""reproduction number"", known as R. This is the average number of contacts to whom an infectious person transmits the disease. If R is below one, it will peter out; above one means it will spread. For seasonal flu, R is around 1.3. For Covid-19, R hovers somewhere between 2 and 3.That one-digit difference is not mathematically, or epidemiologically, trivial. With an R of 2, the number of people infected at each link in the transmission chain doubles. The fifth generation will comprise 32 new cases. If R is 3, the number of new infections triples rather than doubles at every stage. In this scenario, the fifth generation alone numbers 243 new cases. That is why, across countries, the numbers of Covid-19 cases, when plotted against time, show such a steep rise after a few weeks.Now the good news: R is not set in stone. As British epidemiologist Adam Kucharski explains in The Rules of Contagion, there are four factors that feed into R: the duration for which a person is infectious; the number of spreading opportunities per day during that infectious period; the probability that an opportunity leads to transmission; and the susceptibility of the population. ""Breaking the reproduction number down ... can help us work out the best way to control an epidemic,"" writes Kucharski, a member of a modelling team at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, which is advising the UK government on its Covid-19 response. He calls this the DOTS rule: duration, opportunities, transmission and susceptibility. Some of the dots can be massaged downwards. A vaccine is the best way to cut susceptibility - but none for Covid-19 is likely to exist within a year. Other ways to cut R entail reducing both spreading opportunities and the chances of transmission occurring during those opportunities. Those basic ambitions lie at the heart of the unprecedented social and economic shutdowns. Minimising the frequency and length of social interactions starves the virus of the very thing it needs to propagate: human contact. It also slows the spread, allowing the healthcare burden to be spaced out.Danger may come, however, when restrictions are later lifted, especially if there is no vaccine or treatment. Further waves of infections can hit once people, and viruses, start moving around again; this appears to be happening in Hong Kong.It is possible, though not guaranteed, that survivors of the first Covid-19 wave will be immune if a second pulsates around the globe. With serological testing for Covid-19 antibodies - those who have had the virus will carry these, like biological battle scars - and careful society-wide orchestration, any subsequent attempt at suppressing the virus might need not be so disruptive.But these are just hunches; we are in unknown territory. That makes the Covid-19 emergency the mother of all risk-management problems, according to Gilberto Montibeller, professor of management science at Loughborough University.""The disease transmission models are not enough,"" says Montibeller. ""Epidemiologists have been driving policy, which is great, but we need to know other impacts beyond the number of people infected and the care they need. There is a lot of science, such as risk analysis, that hasn't been included in this debate. We also need more understanding of individual behaviour and group behaviour in a pandemic scenario. It's not just about mitigating risk but managing perceived risk too.""Soliciting these insights, Montibeller suggests, might have anticipated the panic-buying seen in several countries. That reaction was predictable, he says, given that the virus is a perfect toxic storm of the dreadful and the unknown.The behavioural science used to inform the UK government's response - trying to ""nudge"" people into staying at home - was also misjudged. ""Nudging wasn't created for these kinds of health threats and it isn't suitable here. Companies and governments now need to raise the quality of decision-making in this very difficult scenario.""In terms of shutting down epidemics, the west must look to Asian countries, which remembered the lessons from Sars. Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea saw their commitment to surveillance, testing and contact tracing rewarded with flatter curves and fewer Covid-19 deaths. Restarting their economies may be a smoother task, since people will know, through testing, whether they have had the disease. New, accelerated ways of developing, testing and manufacturing vaccines will also be an urgent priority; the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, formed in response to the Ebola outbreak, deserves credit for pushing this agenda as an economic imperative.The real and perceived threat of the Covid-19 virus to our future is clearly sky-high. It is an unfamiliar, lethal pathogen with no vaccine, no cure, not even a clear picture as to whether a person can be infected twice. Like all viruses, it mutates as it circulates. It is an invisible enemy in perpetual motion.There are reasons to be optimistic: the race for a vaccine has started, and last week WHO announced a global, nofrills ""mega-trial"" to see if existing drugs could be repurposed to treat Covid-19.But we do not have the upper hand yet. Dr Mike Ryan, who leads WHO's global Covid-19 containment efforts and captained its Ebola response, watched for weeks as Europe, now in the eye of the viral storm, discounted the future and maintained business as usual.At a memorable press conference on March 13, he reminded countries that inertia would be punished. ""Be fast, have no regrets; you must be the first mover,"" he commanded, in a video that itself went viral. ""The virus will always get you if you don't move quickly ... [and] if you need to be right before you move, you will never win.""Panic-buying was predictable, given the virus was a perfect storm of the dreadful and the unknownThe virus, suggests Prof Dunbar, exploits instinctive behavioural shortcuts long practised by our species",Newspaper
229,229,Viruses and the social instinct;Covid-19 needs human contact to flourish. Can its spread be slowed with the help of behavioural science? Anjana Ahuja reports,"March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",1610,1610,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Anjana Ahuja,Viruses and the social instinctCovid-19 needs human contact to flourish. Can its spread be slowed with the help of behavioural science? Anjana Ahuja reports,"T he sculpture, by renowned Indian sand artist Sudarsan Pattnaik, depicts a row of five health workers wearing face masks and staring at the viewer. The message underneath is simple and shaming: ""I stayed at work for you. You stay at home for us.""That slogan in silica captured the frustration felt by many on the front line against Covid-19. Sars-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes it, is now on the rampage across the globe, partly sustained and amplified by human behaviour at every level.On an individual basis, we continued to commute to work, to socialise in bars and restaurants, and traipse to theatres and museums, even after health experts and politicians, alarmed by the crises unfolding in other countries, asked us not to. Back then, it seemed less disruptive to continue life as we knew it: we discounted the future and hoped the virus would burn itself out before reaching our doorstep.We have run out of doorsteps and the consequences are devastating beyond comprehension. The world changes day by day, hour by hour. On Tuesday, the UK, like so many other countries before it, began life under lockdown.Why did people flout social distancing advice? The coronavirus, suggests Professor Robin Dunbar, an evolutionary psychologist at Oxford university, exploits instinctive behavioural shortcuts long practised by our species. For most of our history, survival depended on being a member of a group. ""We are primates - the whole evolutionary strategy of primates is our intense sociality,"" he told me. ""So, it doesn't surprise me that teens and young people were still rushing out. It takes a very long time, perhaps 25 years, to learn about the implications of your behaviour."" The young might also have felt invincible: hospital statistics suggest that children and young adults are largely unaffected, a morsel of consolation amid the panic.Discounting the future can also be a survival instinct, Dunbar points out. Why worry about what lies over the horizon, our ancestors reasoned, when the only thing that matters is today? If we do not survive today, there can be no tomorrow. Covid-19 has prospered in the wake of these behavioural calculations. We need to rethink how to manage our lives in a world of contagion.When I wrote in early January about a mystery pneumonia from China, never did I foresee it metastasising into the Big One, a pandemic to rival the 1918 Spanish flu.Humans have no immunity to novel viruses; we are all ""immunologically naive"", meaning we can all be infected. That is an unfamiliar situation, particularly for those of us in the global north. Most contagious childhood diseases such as measles have been vaccinated away; seasonal flu vaccines offer protection against an annual foe.It is no longer infectious diseases that dominate the health agenda but noncommunicable diseases like heart disease, type 2 diabetes and cancer. Noncommunicable diseases account for 71 per cent of global deaths annually and demand individual, not collective, choices: should I give up smoking? Should I hit the gym or the doughnuts? The risks and benefits are mine alone.Covid-19 demands a different reckoning: the welfare of the collective versus the cost to the individual. You can be infected and transmit the virus without knowing it. According to the WHO, the case fatality ratio (number of deaths divided by number of reported cases) is about 3-4 per cent, with older people and those with underlying health conditions most vulnerable. Your individual chance of dying might be low but the risk to your contacts might be high. That is why social distancing measures are meant to apply to everyone.The way an infectious disease spreads depends on its ""reproduction number"", known as R. This is the average number of contacts to whom an infectious person transmits the disease. If R is below one, it will peter out; above one means it will spread. For seasonal flu, R is around 1.3. For Covid-19, R hovers somewhere between 2 and 3.That one-digit difference is not mathematically, or epidemiologically, trivial. With an R of 2, the number of people infected at each link in the transmission chain doubles. The fifth generation will comprise 32 new cases. If R is 3, the number of new infections triples rather than doubles at every stage. In this scenario, the fifth generation alone numbers 243 new cases. That is why, across countries, the numbers of Covid-19 cases, when plotted against time, show such a steep rise after a few weeks.Now the good news: R is not set in stone. As British epidemiologist Adam Kucharski explains in The Rules of Contagion, there are four factors that feed into R: the duration for which a person is infectious; the number of spreading opportunities per day during that infectious period; the probability that an opportunity leads to transmission; and the susceptibility of the population. ""Breaking the reproduction number down ... can help us work out the best way to control an epidemic,"" writes Kucharski, a member of a modelling team at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, which is advising the UK government on its Covid-19 response. He calls this the DOTS rule: duration, opportunities, transmission and susceptibility. Some of the dots can be massaged downwards. A vaccine is the best way to cut susceptibility - but none for Covid-19 is likely to exist within a year. Other ways to cut R entail reducing both spreading opportunities and the chances of transmission occurring during those opportunities. Those basic ambitions lie at the heart of the unprecedented social and economic shutdowns. Minimising the frequency and length of social interactions starves the virus of the very thing it needs to propagate: human contact. It also slows the spread, allowing the healthcare burden to be spaced out.Danger may come, however, when restrictions are later lifted, especially if there is no vaccine or treatment. Further waves of infections can hit once people, and viruses, start moving around again; this appears to be happening in Hong Kong.It is possible, though not guaranteed, that survivors of the first Covid-19 wave will be immune if a second pulsates around the globe. With serological testing for Covid-19 antibodies - those who have had the virus will carry these, like biological battle scars - and careful society-wide orchestration, any subsequent attempt at suppressing the virus might need not be so disruptive.But these are just hunches; we are in unknown territory. That makes the Covid-19 emergency the mother of all risk-management problems, according to Gilberto Montibeller, professor of management science at Loughborough University.""The disease transmission models are not enough,"" says Montibeller. ""Epidemiologists have been driving policy, which is great, but we need to know other impacts beyond the number of people infected and the care they need. There is a lot of science, such as risk analysis, that hasn't been included in this debate. We also need more understanding of individual behaviour and group behaviour in a pandemic scenario. It's not just about mitigating risk but managing perceived risk too.""Soliciting these insights, Montibeller suggests, might have anticipated the panic-buying seen in several countries. That reaction was predictable, he says, given that the virus is a perfect toxic storm of the dreadful and the unknown.The behavioural science used to inform the UK government's response - trying to ""nudge"" people into staying at home - was also misjudged. ""Nudging wasn't created for these kinds of health threats and it isn't suitable here. Companies and governments now need to raise the quality of decision-making in this very difficult scenario.""In terms of shutting down epidemics, the west must look to Asian countries, which remembered the lessons from Sars. Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea saw their commitment to surveillance, testing and contact tracing rewarded with flatter curves and fewer Covid-19 deaths. Restarting their economies may be a smoother task, since people will know, through testing, whether they have had the disease. New, accelerated ways of developing, testing and manufacturing vaccines will also be an urgent priority; the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, formed in response to the Ebola outbreak, deserves credit for pushing this agenda as an economic imperative.The real and perceived threat of the Covid-19 virus to our future is clearly sky-high. It is an unfamiliar, lethal pathogen with no vaccine, no cure, not even a clear picture as to whether a person can be infected twice. Like all viruses, it mutates as it circulates. It is an invisible enemy in perpetual motion.There are reasons to be optimistic: the race for a vaccine has started, and last week WHO announced a global, nofrills ""mega-trial"" to see if existing drugs could be repurposed to treat Covid-19.But we do not have the upper hand yet. Dr Mike Ryan, who leads WHO's global Covid-19 containment efforts and captained its Ebola response, watched for weeks as Europe, now in the eye of the viral storm, discounted the future and maintained business as usual.At a memorable press conference on March 13, he reminded countries that inertia would be punished. ""Be fast, have no regrets; you must be the first mover,"" he commanded, in a video that itself went viral. ""The virus will always get you if you don't move quickly ... [and] if you need to be right before you move, you will never win.""Panic-buying was predictable, given the virus was a perfect storm of the dreadful and the unknownThe virus, suggests Prof Dunbar, exploits instinctive behavioural shortcuts long practised by our species",Newspaper
233,233,"Finding the goodness in our tribal needs;Two books help us get to grips with tribalism but cannot escape the biases of their own tribes, writes Matthew Taylor","March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",1017,1017,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,"Finding the goodness in our tribal needsTwo books help us get to grips with tribalism but cannot escape the biases of their own tribes, writes Matthew Taylor","Pandemic discourse is just about the only kind of public conversation right now. Inevitably it is partly refracted through tribal affiliations and assumptions. In his talk of the ""Chinese virus"" and early decision to close borders, Donald Trump played to nativist sentiment, while, for progressives, Covid-19 underscores our global interdependence. Libertarians worry about the emergency powers being used by the state, while social democrats claim the crisis reveals how ""neoliberalism"" has weakened welfare and spread economic insecurity.Had coronavirus broken out a decade ago, we might not so readily have anticipated it being weaponised. But, as two more books on the subject are published, understanding tribalism has become an intellectual industry. In Vexed, James Mumford attempts to disrupt the sectarianism of political ideology, while in Tribes, David Lammy argues that progressive values and policies are the antidote.The background to both books lies in changes to the way we understand human motivation, reinforced by the decline in the liberal democratic consensus since its apparent high point at the turn of the century. Behavioural economists, evolutionary and social psychologists - and writers such as Jonathan Haidt and Yuval Noah Harari who have popularised their ideas - have shown how the actions and attitudes of modern people are difficult to explain without reference to our ""hardwired"" instinct for connectedness.The good news is our deep-seated propensity for altruism; the bad is our systematic bias towards our own group and against outsiders. Experiments find that research subjects can develop strong ingroup prejudice based on nothing more than the T-shirt colours people are asked to wear.Just as a more holistic understanding of human need and motives was becoming mainstream, the financial crisis hit. Populism had already been on the rise as people pushed back against globalisation and bureaucracies that seemed impervious to popular concerns ranging from rising inequality to the impact of mass immigration. Post-crash, increasing economic insecurity and flatlining living standards accelerated public disenchantment with what were portrayed as footloose liberal elites.Societies cannot move past the OECD's ""three Ps"" of pessimism, polarisation and populism until we find positive ways to channel our tribal needs. In essence, this has been the thesis in a slew of analyses of the crisis in liberal democracy, of which Amy Chua's Political Tribes and Francis Fukuyama's Identity are much quoted recent examples. Mumford and Lammy are new additions to the reading list.The subtitle of Vexed is ""ethics beyond political tribes"". It starts with the author complaining he doesn't want to have to go all in with either the ideological camps of left or right. There follow six lively, well-argued chapters critiquing left liberals for their predisposition to support sexual freedom, assisted dying and technological transhumanism, and the right for its resistance to gun control, alleviating poverty and the rehabilitation of offenders.Like most political critiques, Mumford can't help occasionally caricaturising opinions he dislikes. Also, it is American Republicans, rather than the milder British Conservatives he used to advise as a think tanker, that are his main targets. Indeed, while the story of political polarisation in America is binary, here in the UK our new tribes have emerged from the Brexit-driven fragmentation of traditional divides.Tribes is an ambitious, and sometimes frustrating, mix of autobiography, social history and political manifesto. Lammy, Labour MP for Tottenham, north London, visits a Tuareg village in Niger, only later to reveal that the DNA test from which he traced these origins was probably erroneous. He poignantly describes feeling out of place as the only black child in his boarding school and a lonely executive in America. We are left wanting more of such candour, but much of the story involves Lammy unapologetically defending stances that others might have perceived as tribal. These include his opposition to the appointment of Sir Martin Moore-Bick to be chair of the inquiry into the Grenfell Tower fire disaster, on the grounds that the retired senior judge could not relate to the experience of living in a social housing estate, or attacking celebrity Stacey Dooley for acting the ""white saviour"" in emoting over an African child as part of the Comic Relief charity appeal. Lammy is not opposed to identity politics, so long as it is in pursuit of his view of social justice.To his credit, he does spend time listening to disillusioned citizens from west London and Peterborough to Wigan in north-west England. He even tries to understand what drove a rightwing extremist to violently and illegally troll him and other Labour MPs on Twitter.Loneliness, atomisation and the divisive tendencies of social media are among the usual suspects.Mumford's prescription for overcoming sectarianism is ethical commitment, or ""moral imagination"" as he puts it. Lammy's plan to make tribalism more inclusive is a fairly standard progressive platform involving democratic reform, decentralisation, redistribution including a Universal Basic Income and investment in community capacity. Mumford's position reads like an updated version of Catholic Social Teaching, while Lammy is a metropolitan left liberal, albeit with communitarian leanings. The problem for those who critique tribalism is that they are members themselves.There is already enough evidence of both communitarianism to inspire hope that the Covid-19 pandemic will bring us together, and of nationalism and selfishness to confirm fears it will widen our divisions. These books help us understand aspects of tribalism. How we move beyond it is another matter entirely.Matthew Taylor is chief executive of the RSA and a former head of the UK prime minister's policy unit Tribes: How Our Need to Belong Can Make or Break the Good Society by David Lammy Constable £20, 344 pages Vexed: Ethics Beyond Political Tribes by James Mumford Bloomsbury £16.99, 216 pages",Newspaper
234,234,"Finding the goodness in our tribal needs;Two books help us get to grips with tribalism but cannot escape the biases of their own tribes, writes Matthew Taylor","March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",1017,1017,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,"Finding the goodness in our tribal needsTwo books help us get to grips with tribalism but cannot escape the biases of their own tribes, writes Matthew Taylor","P andemic discourse is just about the only kind of public conversation right now. Inevitably it is partly refracted through tribal affiliations and assumptions. In his talk of the ""Chinese virus"" and early decision to close borders, Donald Trump played to nativist sentiment, while, for progressives, Covid-19 underscores our global interdependence. Libertarians worry about the emergency powers being used by the state, while social democrats claim the crisis reveals how ""neoliberalism"" has weakened welfare and spread economic insecurity.Had coronavirus broken out a decade ago, we might not so readily have anticipated it being weaponised. But, as two more books on the subject are published, understanding tribalism has become an intellectual industry. In Vexed, James Mumford attempts to disrupt the sectarianism of political ideology, while in Tribes, David Lammy argues that progressive values and policies are the antidote.The background to both books lies in changes to the way we understand human motivation, reinforced by the decline in the liberal democratic consensus since its apparent high point at the turn of the century. Behavioural economists, evolutionary and social psychologists - and writers such as Jonathan Haidt and Yuval Noah Harari who have popularised their ideas - have shown how the actions and attitudes of modern people are difficult to explain without reference to our ""hardwired"" instinct for connectedness.The good news is our deep-seated propensity for altruism; the bad is our systematic bias towards our own group and against outsiders. Experiments find that research subjects can develop strong ingroup prejudice based on nothing more than the T-shirt colours people are asked to wear.Just as a more holistic understanding of human need and motives was becoming mainstream, the financial crisis hit. Populism had already been on the rise as people pushed back against globalisation and bureaucracies that seemed impervious to popular concerns ranging from rising inequality to the impact of mass immigration. Post-crash, increasing economic insecurity and flatlining living standards accelerated public disenchantment with what were portrayed as footloose liberal elites.Societies cannot move past the OECD's ""three Ps"" of pessimism, polarisation and populism until we find positive ways to channel our tribal needs. In essence, this has been the thesis in a slew of analyses of the crisis in liberal democracy, of which Amy Chua's Political Tribes and Francis Fukuyama's Identity are much quoted recent examples. Mumford and Lammy are new additions to the reading list.The subtitle of Vexed is ""ethics beyond political tribes"". It starts with the author complaining he doesn't want to have to go all in with either the ideological camps of left or right. There follow six lively, well-argued chapters critiquing left liberals for their predisposition to support sexual freedom, assisted dying and technological transhumanism, and the right for its resistance to gun control, alleviating poverty and the rehabilitation of offenders.Like most political critiques, Mumford can't help occasionally caricaturising opinions he dislikes. Also, it is American Republicans, rather than the milder British Conservatives he used to advise as a think tanker, that are his main targets. Indeed, while the story of political polarisation in America is binary, here in the UK our new tribes have emerged from the Brexit-driven fragmentation of traditional divides.Tribes is an ambitious, and sometimes frustrating, mix of autobiography, social history and political manifesto. Lammy, Labour MP for Tottenham, north London, visits a Tuareg village in Niger, only later to reveal that the DNA test from which he traced these origins was probably erroneous. He poignantly describes feeling out of place as the only black child in his boarding school and a lonely executive in America. We are left wanting more of such candour, but much of the story involves Lammy unapologetically defending stances that others might have perceived as tribal. These include his opposition to the appointment of Sir Martin Moore-Bick to be chair of the inquiry into the Grenfell Tower fire disaster, on the grounds that the retired senior judge could not relate to the experience of living in a social housing estate, or attacking celebrity Stacey Dooley for acting the ""white saviour"" in emoting over an African child as part of the Comic Relief charity appeal. Lammy is not opposed to identity politics, so long as it is in pursuit of his view of social justice.To his credit, he does spend time listening to disillusioned citizens from west London and Peterborough to Wigan in north-west England. He even tries to understand what drove a rightwing extremist to violently and illegally troll him and other Labour MPs on Twitter.Loneliness, atomisation and the divisive tendencies of social media are among the usual suspects.Mumford's prescription for overcoming sectarianism is ethical commitment, or ""moral imagination"" as he puts it. Lammy's plan to make tribalism more inclusive is a fairly standard progressive platform involving democratic reform, decentralisation, redistribution including a Universal Basic Income and investment in community capacity. Mumford's position reads like an updated version of Catholic Social Teaching, while Lammy is a metropolitan left liberal, albeit with communitarian leanings. The problem for those who critique tribalism is that they are members themselves.There is already enough evidence of both communitarianism to inspire hope that the Covid-19 pandemic will bring us together, and of nationalism and selfishness to confirm fears it will widen our divisions. These books help us understand aspects of tribalism. How we move beyond it is another matter entirely.Matthew Taylor is chief executive of the RSA and a former head of the UK prime minister's policy unit Tribes: How Our Need to Belong Can Make or Break the Good Society by David Lammy Constable £20, 344 pages Vexed: Ethics Beyond Political Tribes by James Mumford Bloomsbury £16.99, 216 pages",Newspaper
236,236,Letter from the editor,"March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",194,194,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Letter from the editor,"Thank you, dear readers, for so many inspiring messages. This week you have written in from Hong Kong, Mumbai, Brussels, London, New York and many places in between. Unsurprisingly you were brimming with wise advice on what to read in the lockdown, and what we should address in the coming weeks.In this edition we have surgeon Henry Marsh on the dilemma for doctors; Anjana Ahuja on page 4 on the limits of behavioural science; the tale of the pub that survived the Black Death but is now struggling, on page 5; and mesmerising coverage of Style, Arts and Books, including more tips on reading.My favourite message this week was a request for us to publish an FTWeekend edition in the middle of the week. I hear you! That may be tricky for now, but we do have a new offering on the www.ft.com homepage. Every day at 12pm UK time we will publish a piece on what to read, view, drink, eat and more in the lockdown; you can then engage online with an FTW writer on the subject.I do hope you are keeping well in these worrying times. My commercial colleagues are working ceaselessly to ensure you still receive your newspaper. Thank you as ever for reading us.Alec Russell",Newspaper
237,237,Letter from the editor,"March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",194,194,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Letter from the editor,"Thank you, dear readers, for so many inspiring messages. This week you have written in from Hong Kong, Mumbai, Brussels, London, New York and many places in between. Unsurprisingly you were brimming with wise advice on what to read in the lockdown, and what we should address in the coming weeks.In this edition we have surgeon Henry Marsh on the dilemma for doctors; Anjana Ahuja on page 4 on the limits of behavioural science; the tale of the pub that survived the Black Death but is now struggling, on page 5; and mesmerising coverage of Style, Arts and Books, including more tips on reading.My favourite message this week was a request for us to publish an FTWeekend edition in the middle of the week. I hear you! That may be tricky for now, but we do have a new offering on the www.ft.com homepage. Every day at 12pm UK time we will publish a piece on what to read, view, drink, eat and more in the lockdown; you can then engage online with an FTW writer on the subject.I do hope you are keeping well in these worrying times. My commercial colleagues are working ceaselessly to ensure you still receive your newspaper. Thank you as ever for reading us.Alec Russell",Newspaper
238,238,Letter from the editor,"March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",194,194,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Letter from the editor,"Thank you, dear readers, for so many inspiring messages. This week you have written in from Hong Kong, Mumbai, Brussels, London, New York and many places in between. Unsurprisingly you were brimming with wise advice on what to read in the lockdown, and what we should address in the coming weeks.In this edition we have surgeon Henry Marsh on the dilemma for doctors; Anjana Ahuja on page 4 on the limits of behavioural science; the tale of the pub that survived the Black Death but is now struggling, on page 5; and mesmerising coverage of Style, Arts and Books, including more tips on reading.My favourite message this week was a request for us to publish an FTWeekend edition in the middle of the week. I hear you! That may be tricky for now, but we do have a new offering on the www.ft.com homepage. Every day at 12pm UK time we will publish a piece on what to read, view, drink, eat and more in the lockdown; you can then engage online with an FTW writer on the subject.I do hope you are keeping well in these worrying times. My commercial colleagues are working ceaselessly to ensure you still receive your newspaper. Thank you as ever for reading us.Alec Russell",Newspaper
241,241,FLU'S NEXT?;DESPERATE BID TO PROTECT MINISTERS ; lBoris could have infected many others ; lRaab on standby to take charge,"March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,The Sun (England),821,821,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,MATT DATHAN; KATE FERGUSON,FLU'S NEXT?DESPERATE BID TO PROTECT MINISTERS ; lBoris could have infected many others ; lRaab on standby to take charge,"COVID-19 is starting to rip through the top of Government and its senior medical advisers, leaving aides wondering: ""Who's next?"" The revelation that Boris Johnson and Health Secretary Matt Hancock were infected sparked an urgent operation to ensure a core team remained free of the infection.It also set off a scramble to find those the pair had been in touch with while they were contagious.However, it left ministers facing allegations that their business-asusual approach had allowed the bug to spread. Professor Susan Michie, director of the Centre for Behaviour Change at University College London, said: ""Whilst the PM was telling people to stay at home and keep at least two metres apart from each other, the House of Commons was open for business and face-to-face parliamentary activities were carrying on.""""  Mr Johnson says he will remain in charge of the Government's fight against coronavirus. But Downing Street confirmed that Foreign Secretary and First Secretary of State Dominic Raab would stand in if Mr Johnson became too unwell to continue.If Mr Raab was also ill, the PM has the power to delegate responsibility to any of his ministers.It is understood Chancellor Rishi Sunak and then Michael Gove are next in command.The PM has been in close contact with more than a dozen senior members of government and advisers over the past week.The infected are contagious for about 60 hours before they start showing symptoms, studies suggest.No10 dispelled fears the PM could have infected the Queen, pointing out that he had not met Her Majesty since March 11 - more than a fortnight ago. On Tuesday, the PM was in the same room as Mr Hancock and chief medical officer Professor Chris Whitty, who is also in selfisolation after displaying symptoms. The next day, Mr Johnson took an extended Prime Minister's Questions in the Commons, where he was in touching distance of Home Secretary Priti Patel, Mr Gove and Commons Leader Jacob Rees-Mogg.Government chief whip Mark Spencer was sat about a metre away from him on the bench.Mr Johnson's parliamentary aide Alex Burghart also came in close contact as he handed the PM his notes, while Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn was within touching distance across the Commons dispatch box.Later that evening - 24 hours before he started to show symptoms - the PM stood alongside Professor Whitty and chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick Vallance at a press conference in No10.On Thursday evening, Mr Johnson appeared alongside the Chancellor Rishi Sunak as they took part in the Clap for Carers campaign in Downing Street.But the pair stood two metres apart and Mr Sunak has not shown symptoms nor been tested.The Chancellor worked from home yesterday and will not return to his Treasury office until Monday.Downing Street aides insisted the PM has since been self-isolating in his flat and has not come into close contact with anyone else.But a couple of No10 aides have also been self-isolating over the past week after showing symptoms.yes Mr Johnson's top adviser Dominic Cummings set tongues wagging yesterday when he was seen running from No10 with a large bag but aides said he was just late for a meeting.The list of people Mr Hancock has been close to is even more extensive.On Tuesday, he stood next to Professor Stephen Powis, national medical director of NHS England, and Dr Jenny Harries, deputy chief medical officer.The following day - when he started showing symptoms - he sat next to Mr Gove.He also appeared on BBC2's Question Time alongside five other guests including the Mayor of Manchester Andy Burnham and TUC leader Frances O'Grady.He was also accused of failing to socially distance himself from the family of 19-year-old motorcyclist Harry Dunn, killed in an accident involving a spy who fled to the US before being charged over his death.Mr Hancock was said to have hugged the family and shaken their hands at a March 18 meeting.Unlike ordinary people, senior members of the Government can get a test because of their importance to the fight against Covid-19.Dr Harries said: ""The PM plays a very critical role in that and that was the basis for the testing.""But, despite the flurry of cases, Downing Street said senior ministers, officials and aides would be tested only if they developed a fever or persistent cough.ters, off on persis Last n fend off ment ha restrictio night, Mr Gove attempted to criticism that the Government had failed to observe the same restrictions it tried to impose on the rest of the country.He said those who were central to the battle against the pandemic would be tested.He added: ""The fact the Prime Minister and Health Secretary contracted the virus is a reminder the virus does not discriminate. We are all at risk.""That is why it's so important we practise social distancing measures."" matthew.dathan@thesun.co.uk Next in line . . Dominic RaabPM & Health Secretary have it..virus does not discriminate MICHAEL GOVE",Newspaper
242,242,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","March 28, 2020 Saturday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1244,1244,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","On Monday evening, Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on 23 March, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Prof Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released last week, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Prof Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next three weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProf Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage being that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""There are also hints that countries in Europe may be on a slightly faster course than China, and may peak sooner, meaning restrictions could be lifted earlier. While cases in China peaked some 72 days after the first recorded infections, public health officials in both Germany and Italy believe that they are starting to see a plateauing now, which could mean a peak of around 57 and 53 days respectively.Earlier this week, the Prime Minister said that we are two weeks behind Italy so Britain may end up peaking by the beginning of April. China left lockdown restrictions in place for nearly a month after the peak, so it is possible restrictions could be lifted early in May.Prof Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming days and weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures which will inform how long they remain in place. She said: ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual actual toll which the epidemic is exacting""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing, for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an 'epidemic of action', and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Prof Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish: they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
249,249,Work Tribes 'I'd like to propose a drinks party - via videoconference' EMMA JACOBS AND ANDREW HILL,"March 30, 2020 Monday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",614,614,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Work Tribes 'I'd like to propose a drinks party - via videoconference' EMMA JACOBS AND ANDREW HILL,"Pippa, Thrust head of community Hi everyone! So great to see inside all your homes. This is you as your true, authentic selves with all your, er, Bob Marley posters and learned libraries.Such weird, uncertain times. Imagine I'm sending you all a virtual hug! It's my job to keep the spirit of London's biggest-looking skyscraper alive. So I'd like to propose a drinks party - via videoconferencing obviously - on Friday night. The theme is ""Venetian masked ball"", in tribute to our Italian compadres. Please use your essential supply-runs to load up on prosecco and Negronis before dialling in.Right, on to the serious stuff: who qualifies to be on our business-critical conference call tomorrow? Sol, management guru It's key to define the mission before we decide who's mission-critical.What does success look like? Is it all of us curled into a sobbing ball in our bedrooms for six months? Or is it - and this is my preference - everyone back in Thrust within days wearing full safety clothing and fuelling a gigantic Meet Read ft.work-economic rebound (well, OK, not exactly everyone, but that's a detail we can brainstorm out later?) There's a chapter in my new book on this - spooky, right? - where I condense papers written by unknown behavioural scientists into a four-letter acronym - Beware! Understand! Relax! Progress! BURP! - and then push it out through webinars, conferences and lucrative coaching sessions.As a superforecaster, my hunch is the whole speaking circuit will come roaring back after this. It's my easily digested leadership pabulum that will be in demand. Hello? Did someone mute me? Katherine, the worried worker Thanks for the invite. Should I be on this call? You don't want one of the higher-ups? I just oversee operations. I've never really seen myself as essential. We've got a chief ethics officer. Don't you want to talk to her instead? The chief operating officer left for his second home just before the government asked people to stay put.Broadband in Cornwall isn't great, though, so I suppose I'm the point-person.Hold on. Alice, darling, do you mind not playing video games, I'm on a call. Shouldn't you be doing some school work? Don't slam the ...! Right, I'm back. Yes, should be fine for tomorrow. I'll draw up plans overnight, once schoolwork and dinner are out of the way. Need to drop some food off for my parents too. What? Nothing, just muttering to myself.James, the vice-president Can I just take a moment to set out why I should be in the office? I am on track for a bumper year and I would smash my stretch goals if it wasn't for this ""panicdemic"". It's playing merry havoc with my sales figures, which would be through the roof under normal circs. I didn't get where I am today by playing safe.Just a minute. Mum, do you mind? I'm on a call. I'll tidy my room later ... promise, and iron my onesie. Hi, I'm back with you. What? You heard that? Joel, the security guard Hi - can you hear me through this mask? OK. Please the tribes the series com/tribes note we've moved from crimson to carmine alert status. We have now left the visible colour spectrum altogether so I will be using a series of noises for future alerts.I hate to say I told you so, but if you'd listened to me in 2017, we would have locked down the building before the foundations had been laid, banned commuting, and punished reckless tissue disposal with custodial sentences.Now I see us heading for intrusive medical testing and electronic surveillance of a scale not seen since I manned the suppliers' entrance at the West Midlands Junior Swimming Championships in 2008. Sorry, I'll have to drop off the call now: I need to sound the klaxon for 5pm curfew.",Newspaper
250,250,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","March 30, 2020 Monday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1244,1244,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","On Monday evening, Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on 23 March, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Prof Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released last week, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Prof Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next three weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProf Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage being that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""There are also hints that countries in Europe may be on a slightly faster course than China, and may peak sooner, meaning restrictions could be lifted earlier. While cases in China peaked some 72 days after the first recorded infections, public health officials in both Germany and Italy believe that they are starting to see a plateauing now, which could mean a peak of around 57 and 53 days respectively.Earlier this week, the Prime Minister said that we are two weeks behind Italy so Britain may end up peaking by the beginning of April. China left lockdown restrictions in place for nearly a month after the peak, so it is possible restrictions could be lifted early in May.Prof Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming days and weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures which will inform how long they remain in place. She said: ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual actual toll which the epidemic is exacting""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing, for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an 'epidemic of action', and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Prof Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish: they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
254,254,"How coronavirus can be stopped in eight weeks;As the US becomes the centre of the pandemic and health services globally brace for disaster, former World Health Organisation director Anthony Costello tells Nafeez Ahmed that it is not too late to regain control of the situation","March 31, 2020 Tuesday",International,The Independent (United Kingdom),2620,2620,England & Wales,NAFEEZ AHMED,"How coronavirus can be stopped in eight weeksAs the US becomes the centre of the pandemic and health services globally brace for disaster, former World Health Organisation director Anthony Costello tells Nafeez Ahmed that it is not too late to regain control of the situation","""We know we can get this under control,"" says Dr Anthony Costello, a former director at the World Health Organisation (WHO) where he headed up maternal, child and adolescent health. ""The problem is that Europe has been too slow to act compared with Asia; and America is now facing a huge crisis.""Costello, who is professor of global health at University College London, where he also previously headed up the UCL Institute for Global Health, spoke to me via telephone from Yorkshire, where he is currently isolating from his family, many of whom are experiencing symptoms of the novel coronavirus.Costello, who joined the WHO from 2015 to 2018 before returning to UCL, pulls no punches about the failures that, he says, have allowed the new coronavirus to rampage across western countries.""America is now the epicentre of the pandemic,""he warns, arguing that the United States may experience the highest rate of fatalities anywhere in the world. London, too, he tells me, ""will face a health service disaster within two to three weeks, because it's been allowed to let rip there. I really fear for our people and my health colleagues.""The reason the US and UK are on track for disaster is due to the failure to take early action, Costello explains. This allowed the virus to spread undetected among communities for as long as two months, setting us up for levels of exponential growth which are now bound to overwhelm healthcare facilities.But he insists it's not yet too late to regain control of the situation. And the data suggests we could do it in as little as seven to eight weeks.""We know that the virus has been circulating in the US at least since mid-January, when a guy flew into Seattle from Wuhan. He seems to have seeded the virus, and since then we have had exponential community transmission,"" Costello says.The Trump administration, however, rapidly changed course on its previous inaction after White House officials read a paper released on 16 March by Imperial College London's Covid-19 Response Team.That paper, produced by the same scientists advising Boris Johnson's government in the UK, used a mathematical model to estimate the consequences of the US and British government's prior strategies of minimalist mitigation.The findings were frightening, forecasting that as many as 1.1 million Americans and 260,000 Britons would die even if more ambitious measures were pursued to slow the epidemic. The only way to avoid this outcome, the Imperial College team recommended, is a comprehensive epidemic suppression strategy enforcing social distancing for 18 months - until a vaccine becomes available.Since then, the US Centres for Disease Control hasadopted the 18-month suppression strategy as part of their official response plan. Meanwhile, Donald Trump has already expressed his reluctance to pursue such a protracted lockdown due to its impact on the global economy.Seemingly vindicating his approach was a separate model produced by Oxford University which made national headlines, claiming that as much as 50 per cent of the British population may have already been infected and built up ""herd immunity"" to the virus - implying that social restrictions could be lifted far more quickly.The study was also amplified by conservative commentators in the US, who suggested that it meantthe US lockdown policy should be ended.But according to Costello, ""both these mathematical models cannot be right. I suspect that the truth might in fact be somewhere in the middle.""WhileImperial College London's modelling of the potential high fatality rate of a ""do nothing""approach has been widely accepted by the scientific community, its 18-month solution strategy has been questioned - as has the Oxford model's opposite approach assuming a buildup of immunity.A study by the New England Complex Systems Institute at New York University found that the Imperial Collegescientists had ignored data from east Asia demonstrating the efficacy of mass testing and contact tracing in suppressing the outbreak and minimising fatalities within around fiveweeks. Epidemiologists and public health experts had also pointed out that the Oxford paper's optimistic modelling was already contradicted by fatality data from Italy. And neither model has supported the best tried-and-tested responses to dealing with an epidemic.As a result, says Costello, the ""United States is now the epicentre of the pandemic. Currently, Britain is a bit ahead of the US, and two and half weeks behind Italy, which is only a few days ahead of Spain, France and Germany.""But the problem is that government has placed the modellers in the forefront of decision-making. SAGE [the UK government's Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies] strikes me as having downplayed the public health view. Which is that you've got to act fast, find the virus, test test test, trace the contacts of those who are infected, isolate and quarantine, and implement strong social distancing. You do all that and what we've seen in east Asia is that you can really contain this, suppress this within seven weeks.""This won't make the virus simply disappear but it buys valuable time and drives down the death rate. According to Costello, while there is nothing wrong with bringing in theoretical experts to do mathematical national modelling, the real problem is that the British government's scientific experts lack significant experience in staving off real-world epidemics.""They are all good academics. I have a great deal of respect for them. But none of them have successfully managed a public health crisis like this. The Imperial College paper, for instance, didn't model the impact of mass testing, and talked only about case isolation. Yet these are precisely the tactics that we know work so well. Mass testing for the virus is already working in places like South Korea, where they've managed to find a way to keep this at bay without draconian lockdowns.""Costello is sceptical of the official claim that the reason we didn't rapidly bring in mass testing is the lack of capacity.He cites virologist Professor Julian Peto of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine who, Costello tells me, has ""rightly rubbished the idea that we don't have the capacity for testing. Just one real-time PCR machine can be used to undertake as many as 10,000 tests over two weeks. All we would have needed to do was ramp this up, mobilising local research labs around the country to reach hundreds of thousands, if not millions. We haven't done this, and the question is, why?""We knew at the end of January that a crisis was developing in Wuhan, and any crisis management team would ask, is there a chance it could come to London, or Washington. And the answer at that time from public health experts was simple: yes. We should have started preparing for the worse case scenario. We didn't.""There is still time to get ahead of the crisis, Costello says. ""We have London surging. Many parts of the US are similarly surging. In the UK we also have the West Midlands and some other areas. But there are other places where we don't really know what's going on, because we just aren't doing much community testing. Testing of health workers is essential, but without community testing we can't see what's going on, we can't tell how the epidemic is spreading. It's being able to tell that which allows us to move in rapidly to isolate cases, and this is the key to being able to slowly return to some degree of normalcy.""After announcing the end of the community testing earlier in March, the government U-turned and declared it would ramp up community testing, with Johnson promising 25,000 tests a day. But it still hasn't happened. ""Community virus testing hasn't properly kicked off. We are still doing a maximum of around 5,000 tests a day. This is way too low.""Costello is also concerned about tepid government messaging. ""It's not enough to just have modellers, virologists, and behavioural scientists. You need people who can translate this into action. Social scientists. Public health experts experienced in community mobilisation. Right now we are locked into this strange idea that the prime minister or president makes a speech and suddenly the entire country changes its mind. That's just a fantasy. Throughout my career I've seen that just giving people a few of the right messages won't necessarily change behaviour. We need a more serious decentralised approach and to share data with local communities.""He refers to some of China's mass communications measures. ""The Chinese managed to suppress the virus in provinces outside Wuhan without the same sort of total lockdown by operating quickly. They had a TV station giving out information on the virus round-the-clock on a 24-hour basis. We had policing of supermarkets and pharmacies. But most importantly we had a comprehensive mass testing and contact tracing programme. And proper protection for frontline health workers. And that's how this was brought under control within sevenweeks.""In contrast, Costello warns that the situation facing frontline health workers in the US and UK is nothing short of disastrous. ""We simply don't have enough PPE [personal protective equipment]. Not enough visors, not enough N95 respirators. Government is not following WHO guidelines.""I saw this first-hand when I had to call the emergency services to come and see to my 75-year-old father. He has dementia, diabetes, heart disease and has had multiple strokes. Earlier this week, he tested positive for Covid-19. He is currently in a stable condition in a London hospital. When the paramedics arrived, they wore little more than surgical masks - known to be largely useless in repelling coronaviruses - and thin bibs made out of what looked like the same material as plastic bags. It's quite possible, if not likely, that they were infected as a result of handling my father - and that they may, in turn, be infecting others whom they deal with during the course of their jobs. But while I've been advised to self-isolate after my own contact with my father, no one has told these frontline workers to do the same, and they haven't been tested - the government only announced a ramp-up of testing for healthcare staff at the end of March.Costello welcomes the measure, but is clear that it is far from sufficient. While the US government has continued to dither on testing, the UK government has announced plans to make test kits available to millions. ""I'm worried about the immune response tests they are bringing in. These tests might only become positive a week or two after infection. So they are not a good diagnostic test for active infection. If a health worker tests negative and, reassured, goes back to work they might be actively infectious.""Further, there is no central coordination for the testing. Costello thinks immune tests will give useful population information but may not give data to authorities which they can use to systematically trace contacts, isolate cases, and contain outbreaks.He points out that in east Asia - Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and beyond - while there have been new outbreaks, their coordinated mass test-trace suppression strategies have proven that a huge resurgence of Covid-19 is not necessarily inevitable. The approach means that when outbreaks do reoccur, they can be more effectively contained.But what about the resurgence of cases, I wonder, occurring in Hong Kong, South Korea and other places? Hong Kong, for instance has had to resort to stronger lockdowns to suppress a sudden upsurge in new cases as restrictions were relaxed.Costello points out that their success in minimalising fatalities, and their capacity to move fast to identify and isolate outbreaks, puts them in a better position to respond.""We are playing for time,""says Costello. And it's in that that we can learn more about the virus. ""We don't know yet how many asymptomatic people are being infected and building immunity. With these people identified they can get back to work. We don't know how much herd immunity has been created. The more we learn, the more we can get our economy going a bit more with careful monitoring for outbreaks. And we don't know when a vaccine will arrive.""What does the next 18 months look like then? In Costello's view, with the right strategy, it doesn't need to be a permanent, full-scale lockdown - but this can only be achieved with a nimble, adaptive approach based on the interplay between mass testing, tracing and isolation, and the data that can be developed from doing so.""The strategy is to firstly get suppression as in China, South Korea, Hong Kong and so on, which takes about two months. And to save lives and not overwhelm the health services in this first phase. Secondly, this buys time to explore other medium strategies for loosening thelockdown, depending upon the data on immunity and ways to get the economy moving. Thirdly, you get a safe vaccine.""I ask Costello about the herd immunitycontroversy. Is it possible that we might develop sufficient levels of immunity in the population that preventthe disease from being a problem? Is that how we will eventually beat this? Or are we doomed to have this virus surge back every time we relax restrictions?In the long run, he told me, it might be possible that populations do eventually build up immunity to the virus.""The general idea that we might eventually build up herd immunity has a certain plausibility in the sense that lots of viruses spread around and a lot of people get sub-clinical infections, and immunity can build up that way. It's a phenomenon that's well known. We know well that when most of the population are infected and asymptomatic, this can happen. My view is that the truth of what's in store may lie somewhere in between the Oxford and Imperial models. The bottom line is that we don't know the quality of that immunity that we get after recovering from this coronavirus, and how long it will last. Virologists say that generally we don't get long-lasting immunity from coronaviruses. We might also get new strains due to mutations. So even if lots of people have been exposed, we don't know the quality of the immunity, there may still be a second surge. There are all sorts of unknowns.""Costello comes back to the importance of coordinated testing. ""We need to go out and do mass testing for the virus in communities. This tells us who has it, and where. That information can be given back to communities so authorities and citizens know what's happening in their area. Whether it's a nasal swab or an antibody test, we need to do this so that we can base our strategies on actual data. We can only go so far with theoretical models.""Herd immunity or not, Costello is clear that it is a huge mistake to simply let the virus run. The biggest danger is that if the virus is allowed to simply spread without controls - as it had been for nearly two months - the overwhelming impact on healthcare facilities due to the sheer number of cases requiring hospitalisation could drive fatality rates much higher than anticipated, as is happening in Italy. The model's warning of the risk of millions of deaths in such a scenario are, Costello says, very possible.""If I was advising the government, I would give people a more feasible lockdown period as long as we are very strict. That, as in Asia, we can get this under control in about two months. Even Wuhan is starting to open up. My fear is that we will now have a longer lead time to achieve this, because we have already let it run. But if we focus on an eight-week challenge, with mass testing to inform a systematic approach to tracing and isolating, we may not need an 18-month lockdown.""",Newspaper
257,257,Muddling through does not work for pandemics;Letters,"March 31, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",117,117,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Muddling through does not work for pandemicsLetters,"In 1959, Charles Lindblom wrote The Science of ""Muddling Through"", advocating an incremental approach to public policy and management. ""Muddling through"" does not work for pandemics. The science of pandemics is dominated by epidemiology, not behavioural science. The delay between policy decisions (or indecisions) and the resultant high UK death rate needs tracing back from the prime minister and his advisers to Cobra, the chief scientific adviser, and the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. However, this is one form of contact tracing that can be delayed until the inevitable public inquiry. Dr Duncan Robertson Fellow in Management Studies, St Catherine's College, University of Oxford, UK",Newspaper
258,258,Muddling through does not work for pandemics;Letters,"March 31, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",117,117,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Muddling through does not work for pandemicsLetters,"In 1959, Charles Lindblom wrote The Science of ""Muddling Through"", advocating an incremental approach to public policy and management. ""Muddling through"" does not work for pandemics. The science of pandemics is dominated by epidemiology, not behavioural science. The delay between policy decisions (or indecisions) and the resultant high UK death rate needs tracing back from the prime minister and his advisers to Cobra, the chief scientific adviser, and the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. However, this is one form of contact tracing that can be delayed until the inevitable public inquiry. Dr Duncan Robertson Fellow in Management Studies, St Catherine's College, University of Oxford, UK",Newspaper
259,259,Muddling through does not work for pandemics;Letters,"March 31, 2020 Tuesday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",117,117,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Muddling through does not work for pandemicsLetters,"In 1959, Charles Lindblom wrote The Science of ""Muddling Through"", advocating an incremental approach to public policy and management. ""Muddling through"" does not work for pandemics. The science of pandemics is dominated by epidemiology, not behavioural science. The delay between policy decisions (or indecisions) and the resultant high UK death rate needs tracing back from the prime minister and his advisers to Cobra, the chief scientific adviser, and the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. However, this is one form of contact tracing that can be delayed until the inevitable public inquiry. Dr Duncan Robertson Fellow in Management Studies, St Catherine's College, University of Oxford, UK",Newspaper
261,261,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","March 31, 2020 Tuesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1246,1246,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the            restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""There are also hints that countries in Europe may be on a slightly faster course than China, and may peak sooner, meaning restrictions could be lifted earlier. While cases in China peaked some 72 days after the first recorded infections, public health officials in both Germany and Italy believe that they are starting to see a plateauing now, which could mean a peak of around 57 and 53 days respectively.Earlier this week, the Prime Minister said that we are two weeks behind Italy so Britain may end up peaking by the beginning of April. China left lockdown restrictions in place for nearly a month after the peak, so it is possible restrictions could be lifted early in May.Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming days and weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
266,266,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"April 1, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),333,333,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Greg Hurst,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"Reading The Times is one way to help ward off dementia, according to a study. Researchers found that mentally stimulating activities can significantly lower the risk of developing the condition. People who read a daily newspaper, pursue a hobby and engage in cultural activities had a 26 per cent lower likelihood of dementia than those who did not.Once other factors associated with a lower risk of developing dementia were taken into account, such as wealth, being married or in a relationship, not smoking and being in good physical health, the risk dropped to 40 per cent.It concluded that intellectually-focused leisure activities and light physical exercise helped to build up a cognitive reserve that can mitigate the symptoms of neurodegenerative disorders. People who had a professional career or a mentally challenging job had higher levels of cognitive reserve as did those educated to degree level.The study, by behavioural scientists at University College London, monitored data from 12,280 adults aged 50 and older over 15 years. The results were published in the British Journal of Psychiatry.Participants were grouped according to leisure interests, based on questions about whether and how often they took part in 16 different activities, and also by occupation and education.The authors said it was the first study to look at the overall effect of cognitive reserve at staving off dementia and the factors that contribute to it in a large representative sample of the English population. All participants were free of dementia at the start but over the time studied 602 developed the condition.The senior author Dorina Cadar, senior research fellow at UCL's department of behavioural science, said: ""In times of confinement like now you still can do things to [stimulate] your brain. The more you are engaged and mentally stimulated and also socially connected ... it is protective so it is just not one single benefit but the multifactoral aspect of having rich leisure activities.""",Newspaper
267,267,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"April 1, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),333,333,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Greg Hurst,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"Reading The Times is one way to help ward off dementia, according to a study. Researchers found that mentally stimulating activities can significantly lower the risk of developing the condition. People who read a daily newspaper, pursue a hobby and engage in cultural activities had a 26 per cent lower likelihood of dementia than those who did not.Once other factors associated with a lower risk of developing dementia were taken into account, such as wealth, being married or in a relationship, not smoking and being in good physical health, the risk dropped to 40 per cent.It concluded that intellectually-focused leisure activities and light physical exercise helped to build up a cognitive reserve that can mitigate the symptoms of neurodegenerative disorders. People who had a professional career or a mentally challenging job had higher levels of cognitive reserve as did those educated to degree level.The study, by behavioural scientists at University College London, monitored data from 12,280 adults aged 50 and older over 15 years. The results were published in the British Journal of Psychiatry.Participants were grouped according to leisure interests, based on questions about whether and how often they took part in 16 different activities, and also by occupation and education.The authors said it was the first study to look at the overall effect of cognitive reserve at staving off dementia and the factors that contribute to it in a large representative sample of the English population. All participants were free of dementia at the start but over the time studied 602 developed the condition.The senior author Dorina Cadar, senior research fellow at UCL's department of behavioural science, said: ""In times of confinement like now you still can do things to [stimulate] your brain. The more you are engaged and mentally stimulated and also socially connected ... it is protective so it is just not one single benefit but the multifactoral aspect of having rich leisure activities.""",Newspaper
268,268,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"April 1, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),333,333,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Greg Hurst,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"Reading The Times is one way to help ward off dementia, according to a study. Researchers found that mentally stimulating activities can significantly lower the risk of developing the condition. People who read a daily newspaper, pursue a hobby and engage in cultural activities had a 26 per cent lower likelihood of dementia than those who did not.Once other factors associated with a lower risk of developing dementia were taken into account, such as wealth, being married or in a relationship, not smoking and being in good physical health, the risk dropped to 40 per cent.It concluded that intellectually-focused leisure activities and light physical exercise helped to build up a cognitive reserve that can mitigate the symptoms of neurodegenerative disorders. People who had a professional career or a mentally challenging job had higher levels of cognitive reserve as did those educated to degree level.The study, by behavioural scientists at University College London, monitored data from 12,280 adults aged 50 and older over 15 years. The results were published in the British Journal of Psychiatry.Participants were grouped according to leisure interests, based on questions about whether and how often they took part in 16 different activities, and also by occupation and education.The authors said it was the first study to look at the overall effect of cognitive reserve at staving off dementia and the factors that contribute to it in a large representative sample of the English population. All participants were free of dementia at the start but over the time studied 602 developed the condition.The senior author Dorina Cadar, senior research fellow at UCL's department of behavioural science, said: ""In times of confinement like now you still can do things to [stimulate] your brain. The more you are engaged and mentally stimulated and also socially connected ... it is protective so it is just not one single benefit but the multifactoral aspect of having rich leisure activities.""",Newspaper
269,269,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"April 1, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),334,334,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Greg Hurst,How reading The Times can help keep dementia at bay,"Reading The Times is one way to help ward off dementia, according to a study. Researchers found that mentally stimulating activities can significantly lower the risk of developing the condition. People who read a daily newspaper, pursue a hobby and engage in cultural activities had a 26 per cent lower likelihood of dementia than those who did not.Once other factors associated with a lower risk of developing dementia were taken into account, such as wealth, being married or in a relationship, not smoking and being in good physical health, the risk dropped to 40 per cent.A study concluded that intellectually focused leisure activities and light physical exercise helped to build up a cognitive reserve that can mitigate the symptoms of neurodegenerative disorders. People who had a professional career or a mentally challenging job had higher levels of cognitive reserve as did those educated to degree level.The study, by behavioural scientists at University College London, monitored data from 12,280 adults aged 50 and older over 15 years. The results were published in the British Journal of Psychiatry.Participants were grouped according to leisure interests, based on questions about whether and how often they took part in 16 different activities, and also by occupation and education.The authors said it was the first study to look at the overall effect of cognitive reserve at staving off dementia and the factors that contribute to it in a large representative sample of the English population. All participants were free of dementia at the start but over the time studied 602 developed the condition.The senior author, Dorina Cadar, senior research fellow at UCL's department of behavioural science, said: ""In times of confinement like now you still can do things to [stimulate] your brain. The more you are engaged and mentally stimulated and also socially connected ... it is protective so it is just not one single benefit but the multifactoral aspect of having rich leisure activities.""",Newspaper
271,271,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 1, 2020 Wednesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1348,1348,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""There are also hints that countries in Europe may be on a slightly faster course than China, and may peak sooner, meaning restrictions could be lifted earlier. While cases in China peaked some 72 days after the first recorded infections, public health officials in both Germany and Italy believe that they are starting to see a plateauing now, which could mean a peak of around 57 and 53 days respectively.Earlier this week, the Prime Minister said that we are two weeks behind Italy so Britain may end up peaking by the beginning of April. China left lockdown restrictions in place for nearly a month after the peak, so it is possible restrictions could be lifted early in May.Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming days and weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
282,282,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 2, 2020 Thursday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1348,1348,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""There are also hints that countries in Europe may be on a slightly faster course than China, and may peak sooner, meaning restrictions could be lifted earlier. While cases in China peaked some 72 days after the first recorded infections, public health officials in both Germany and Italy believe that they are starting to see a plateauing now, which could mean a peak of around 57 and 53 days respectively.Earlier this week, the Prime Minister said that we are two weeks behind Italy so Britain may end up peaking by the beginning of April. China left lockdown restrictions in place for nearly a month after the peak, so it is possible restrictions could be lifted early in May.Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming days and weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
288,288,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 3, 2020 Friday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1234,1234,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
291,291,Strong collective action will see us overcome the crisis;The behavioural scientist,"April 4, 2020 Saturday",International,The Daily Telegraph (London),259,259,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Prof Pete,Strong collective action will see us overcome the crisisThe behavioural scientist,"From the perspective of human behaviour, our situation is unprecedented in modern times. To understand what might happen next, I recommend first pausing to consider how we got here.A month ago, I regarded the phrase ""global community"" as fanciful, perhaps even oxymoronic. Yet the response to the coronavirus pandemic may be the most extensive global collective action undertaken by human beings in our history.In entering global lockdown, billions of people have sacrificed liberty, company and participation in wider society, all for the greater good.For decades behavioural scientists have studied how individuals make sacrifices for common goals. Two crucial success factors are the desirability of the goal and whether everyone can see clearly how their behaviour leads to it. Thus far, the first factor has been straightforward.Random and potentially lethal infection is frightening and reducing it highly desirable. The second factor, meanwhile, has been ensured by a massive global public health campaign. However, once infection is declining, what is the common goal? Epidemiologists, behavioural scientists and politicians will need to work together to articulate why some behaviours are fine but others not.Feedback on progress towards a collective goal is vital. One possibility is to relax restrictions in small steps, making each conditional on infections continuing to fall.Extraordinary global solidarity has characterised our initial response to this crisis. Getting out of it will require more subtle, but equally strong, collective action.",Newspaper
294,294,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 4, 2020 Saturday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1234,1234,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
301,301,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 5, 2020 Sunday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1234,1234,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
303,303,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 5, 2020 Sunday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1234,1234,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
310,310,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 7, 2020 Tuesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1329,1329,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.Dominic Raab, deputising for Boris Johnson, said on Tuesday that the worst thing the country could do was ""take its foot off the peddle"" in terms of the strict social distancing measures when asked whether the Government had decided to extend the lockdown.""In terms of the review, we are not at that stage yet,"" he said. ""We will take any decision when the time is right, based on the facts and the scientific and medical advice.""Our number one and overriding focus right now is on conveying the key message which is that everyone needs to keep adhering to this guidance.""•What the UK lockdown means for youFor a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, China has announced it will           finally be ending lockdown in Wuhanon April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
315,315,Clear as mud;business commentary Alistair Osborne,"April 9, 2020 Thursday",International,The Times (London),215,215,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Clear as mudbusiness commentary Alistair Osborne,"Another victory for nudge theory. As if the government hasn't had enough trouble with that over social distancing. Now its pitfalls have been underlined by Sam Woods. Who he? The Prudential Regulation Authority chief, whose efforts to corral UK insurers into line has so far produced one flagrant outlier.On Tuesday last week he penned a missive urging insurers ""considering any distributions to shareholders"" to ""pay close attention to the need to protect policyholders"". A big hint, then, that dividends were a Covid-19 no-no.The upshot? Legal & General boss Nigel Wilson rushing out a statement late on Friday, confirming its ""current intention"" to pay its £752 million divvy - after checking that it was still OK with the PRA. Five days on, Mr Woods looks to have hardened his position. After Aviva, RSA, Direct Line and Hiscox halted their payouts, the PRA swiftly welcomed ""the prudent decision from some insurance companies"". Note ""some"". So does that mean the likes of M&G and Admiral must fall into line? Or must L&G revisit its ""current"" intentions? It's not exactly clear. Yes, L&G doesn't have the general insurance exposure of some rivals. But Mr Woods' nudging has produced a muddle. Its highlighted something else, too: an apparent lack of faith in his own prudential regulation.",Newspaper
316,316,Clear as mud;business commentary Alistair Osborne,"April 9, 2020 Thursday",International,The Times (London),215,215,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Alistair Osborne,Clear as mudbusiness commentary Alistair Osborne,"Another victory for nudge theory. As if the government hasn't had enough trouble with that over social distancing. Now its pitfalls have been underlined by Sam Woods. Who he? The Prudential Regulation Authority chief, whose efforts to corral UK insurers into line has so far produced one flagrant outlier.On Tuesday last week he penned a missive urging insurers ""considering any distributions to shareholders"" to ""pay close attention to the need to protect policyholders"". A big hint, then, that dividends were a Covid-19 no-no.The upshot? Legal & General boss Nigel Wilson rushing out a statement late on Friday, confirming its ""current intention"" to pay its £752 million divvy - after checking that it was still OK with the PRA. Five days on, Mr Woods looks to have hardened his position. After Aviva, RSA, Direct Line and Hiscox halted their payouts, the PRA swiftly welcomed ""the prudent decision from some insurance companies"". Note ""some"". So does that mean the likes of M&G and Admiral must fall into line? Or must L&G revisit its ""current"" intentions? It's not exactly clear. Yes, L&G doesn't have the general insurance exposure of some rivals. But Mr Woods' nudging has produced a muddle. Its highlighted something else, too: an apparent lack of faith in his own prudential regulation.",Newspaper
317,317,Clear as mud;business commentary Alistair Osborne,"April 9, 2020 Thursday",International,The Times (London),215,215,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Clear as mudbusiness commentary Alistair Osborne,"Another victory for nudge theory. As if the government hasn't had enough trouble with that over social distancing. Now its pitfalls have been underlined by Sam Woods. Who he? The Prudential Regulation Authority chief, whose efforts to corral UK insurers into line has so far produced one flagrant outlier.On Tuesday last week he penned a missive urging insurers ""considering any distributions to shareholders"" to ""pay close attention to the need to protect policyholders"". A big hint, then, that dividends were a Covid-19 no-no.The upshot? Legal & General boss Nigel Wilson rushing out a statement late on Friday, confirming its ""current intention"" to pay its £752 million divvy - after checking that it was still OK with the PRA. Five days on, Mr Woods looks to have hardened his position. After Aviva, RSA, Direct Line and Hiscox halted their payouts, the PRA swiftly welcomed ""the prudent decision from some insurance companies"". Note ""some"". So does that mean the likes of M&G and Admiral must fall into line? Or must L&G revisit its ""current"" intentions? It's not exactly clear. Yes, L&G doesn't have the general insurance exposure of some rivals. But Mr Woods' nudging has produced a muddle. Its highlighted something else, too: an apparent lack of faith in his own prudential regulation.",Newspaper
322,322,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 9, 2020 Thursday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1340,1340,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. But given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is            unlikely the restrictions will be lifted then.On Thursday evening, Dominic Raab, deputising for Boris Johnson, said that the lockdown measures will ""have to stay in place until we've got the evidence that clearly shows we've moved beyond the peak"" when asked whether the Government had decided to extend the rules.Mr Raab also said: ""SAGE will meet next week to discuss the latest evidence and we'll keep the measures we put in place under review.""For a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. •How long do lockdowns last? Countries which acted fastest could be freed firstLess than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""           Business experts have also called for young people, aged between 20 and 30, to be allowed out of lockdown early saying it could help get Britain moving again and avoid an ""extraordinary recession"".The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, the            lockdown in Wuhanfinally ended on April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastProfessor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
325,325,Young people 'should be first to be released from the lockdown',"April 10, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),620,620,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Oliver Wright,Young people 'should be first to be released from the lockdown',"Young people who are not living with their parents could be allowed to travel freely before the rest of the population, under Covid-19 plans being discussed in Whitehall.Officials are studying a report from the economics and behavioural science department at Warwick University which said that about four million people between the ages of 20 and 30 should resume a semi-normal life as part of the first stage in easing the lockdown. The paper, to which the former cabinet secretary Lord O'Donnell contributed, argued that this group was least at risk from the virus and was financially the hardest hit.The author of the report, Andrew Oswald, said: ""So far we have quite rightly followed the epidemiological evidence. But eventually we have to lift our heads up. We can't sit in our houses until Christmas.""The development comes as a think tank warned that younger workers would pay the highest price in reduced living standards from the crisis.The Resolution Foundation said there was increasing evidence that younger people had been more likely to lose their jobs than older workers and those leaving education and looking for jobs would also be hit hard.""With over a million under-25s entering the labour market for the first time each year … today's young education leavers will pay a high price from the necessary public health measures being taken,"" Torsten Bell, the organisation's chief executive, said.Ministers are grappling with how to ease restrictions amid warnings that any reduction in the lockdown is likely to lead to more cases.A confidential European Union paper on plans to reduce restrictions warned starkly that ""any level of [gradual] relaxation of the confinement will inevitably lead to a corresponding increase in new cases"".However, with a vaccine most likely to be a year away there is growing pressure on ministers to publish a plan to gradually return life to normal while minimising the number of people who will get seriously ill.A unit has been set up in Downing Street and the Cabinet Office to look at options and advise the cabinet alongside the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies.Professor Oswald's analysis points to estimates showing that the fatality rate for Covid 19 in the 20-30 age group is 0.03 per cent, and the critical-care rate 0.06 per cent.It says such a release would not therefore be ""costless in human sufferwould ing"" but adds: ""There would be tragic cases; [but] in the current situation there is no riskless way forward.""The analysis says the effects of releasing this group from lockdown ""would be far, far smaller than those from any general release of the population"".Professor Oswald said that he had researched the paper - aimed at senior policy makers in Whitehall - because ""we do need ideas"" on how to eventually end the lockdown.He added that 20 to 30-year-olds represented a fifth of the economy and said such moves could allow the limited reopening of bars and restaurants - but only if those people were in the right age category.Professor Oswald said that the plan also be clearly explained to the public and could allow a semblance of normal life to begin again while minimising health risks.? The government said it would not block furloughed employees from taking on additional work during the coronavirus crisis. The move is designed to boost the economy and help badly hit sectors such as care providers and farmers, who face difficulty with the coming harvest. Universal credit applications in the UK surged to ten times their normal level in the two weeks leading up to April 1, but millions of people are also about to be furloughed, with their jobs placed on hold and 80 per cent of their salaries being paid under a government scheme.",Newspaper
326,326,Young people 'should be first to be released from the lockdown',"April 10, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),620,620,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Oliver Wright,Young people 'should be first to be released from the lockdown',"Young people who are not living with their parents could be allowed to travel freely before the rest of the population, under Covid-19 plans being discussed in Whitehall.Officials are studying a report from the economics and behavioural science department at Warwick University which said that about four million people between the ages of 20 and 30 should resume a semi-normal life as part of the first stage in easing the lockdown. The paper, to which the former cabinet secretary Lord O'Donnell contributed, argued that this group was least at risk from the virus and was financially the hardest hit.The author of the report, Andrew Oswald, said: ""So far we have quite rightly followed the epidemiological evidence. But eventually we have to lift our heads up. We can't sit in our houses until Christmas.""The development comes as a think tank warned that younger workers would pay the highest price in reduced living standards from the crisis.The Resolution Foundation said there was increasing evidence that younger people had been more likely to lose their jobs than older workers and those leaving education and looking for jobs would also be hit hard.""With over a million under-25s entering the labour market for the first time each year … today's young education leavers will pay a high price from the necessary public health measures being taken,"" Torsten Bell, the organisation's chief executive, said.Ministers are grappling with how to ease restrictions amid warnings that any reduction in the lockdown is likely to lead to more cases.A confidential European Union paper on plans to reduce restrictions warned starkly that ""any level of [gradual] relaxation of the confinement will inevitably lead to a corresponding increase in new cases"".However, with a vaccine most likely to be a year away there is growing pressure on ministers to publish a plan to gradually return life to normal while minimising the number of people who will get seriously ill.A unit has been set up in Downing Street and the Cabinet Office to look at options and advise the cabinet alongside the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies.Professor Oswald's analysis points to estimates showing that the fatality rate for Covid 19 in the 20-30 age group is 0.03 per cent, and the critical-care rate 0.06 per cent.It says such a release would not therefore be ""costless in human sufferwould ing"" but adds: ""There would be tragic cases; [but] in the current situation there is no riskless way forward.""The analysis says the effects of releasing this group from lockdown ""would be far, far smaller than those from any general release of the population"".Professor Oswald said that he had researched the paper - aimed at senior policy makers in Whitehall - because ""we do need ideas"" on how to eventually end the lockdown.He added that 20 to 30-year-olds represented a fifth of the economy and said such moves could allow the limited reopening of bars and restaurants - but only if those people were in the right age category.Professor Oswald said that the plan also be clearly explained to the public and could allow a semblance of normal life to begin again while minimising health risks.? The government said it would not block furloughed employees from taking on additional work during the coronavirus crisis. The move is designed to boost the economy and help badly hit sectors such as care providers and farmers, who face difficulty with the coming harvest. Universal credit applications in the UK surged to ten times their normal level in the two weeks leading up to April 1, but millions of people are also about to be furloughed, with their jobs placed on hold and 80 per cent of their salaries being paid under a government scheme.",Newspaper
329,329,Which Way Out?;A successful exit strategy from the lockdown will depend on public support. The government should publish its plans and let parliament debate them,"April 10, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),659,659,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Which Way Out?A successful exit strategy from the lockdown will depend on public support. The government should publish its plans and let parliament debate them,"The government said that it would review the lockdown restrictions to tackle the coronavirus pandemic after three weeks. There is of course no prospect of any restrictions being lifted for some weeks yet. Not when deaths from Covid-19 rose by another 881 yesterday, taking the total to 7,978, while the number of those confirmed as infected rose by 4,344 to 65,077. There have been some tentative signs from Italy and Spain, the two European countries hardest hit, that after a month of lockdowns the daily toll of deaths has peaked and the curve of new infections has flattened. Britain is not at that point yet, so the restrictions must remain in place. Polls suggest the overwhelming majority of people accept that.Nonetheless that does not mean it is too soon to start planning an exit strategy. In fact it is vital that the government does so if public confidence is to be sustained as the costs of the lockdown become clear. Those costs are measured in terms of jobs and livelihoods destroyed, the eye-watering rise in public debt, the damage to the prospects of younger generations and the wider toll on physical and mental health arising from operations cancelled and treatments forgone. All these costs need to be carefully weighed in deciding when and how to ease the restrictions. There are no right answers, only difficult trade-offs. The government's first task is to define its objective. Is the goal to suppress all transmission of the virus so that people can resume normal life without fear of infection? This appears to be the approach taken by China and many Asian countries. True also in New Zealand, where restrictions are only being lifted as deaths and new infections dip towards zero. Such an exit strategy would rely on mass testing, contact tracing and isolation of fresh infections as well as strict border controls. Or is the goal simply to ensure that the pandemic does not overwhelm the NHS? That would mark a return to the ""herd immunity"" strategy that the government was pursuing until its abrupt U-turn in mid-March. This approach would at the least require a substantial increase in NHS capacity but would allow for an earlier lifting of restrictions.Even when the government is clear on what it is trying to achieve, it will face hard choices. Should it go for a phased approach like Austria, which is lifting restrictions on retailers first? Or should it lift restrictions first for younger people not living with their parents, who are least at risk from dying from the disease but have most to lose from long lockdowns, as a paper by economists at Warwick University has suggested? Should restrictions be lifted sooner in parts of the country that appear to be free of the disease? Should older people and those with underlying conditions be required to continue to self-isolate? Should schools reopen early, as a paper from University College London suggests? Or should they remain closed, as China and Italy have concluded? When should bars and restaurants reopen? When will public gatherings including sports events and theatre performances be allowed? Can technology be used to enforce partial lockdowns and trace contacts as in some Asian countries? Is there a role for immunity certificates if an antibody test is found? These are not questions to be delegated to scientists. They are political judgments that need to be informed by insights drawn from a range of disciplines including medicine, economics and behavioural science. Nor are they questions that should be taken behind closed doors. Any successful exit needs to have the support of the public. The government has already learnt through its bungled handling of the early stages of this crisis the costs of failing to be transparent. Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, has rightly called for ministers to publish their exit strategy. The government should do so and parliament must be allowed to debate it. Britain cannot afford to get this wrong.",Newspaper
332,332,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","April 10, 2020 Friday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1410,1410,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation, the London Underground was still jammed with commuters","On 23 March, Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.At the time, The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. On Thursday 9 April, Dominic Raab, deputising for Boris Johnson, said that the lockdown measures will ""have to stay in place until we've got the evidence that clearly shows we've moved beyond the peak"" when asked whether the Government had decided to extend the rules.Mr Raab also said: ""SAGE will meet next week to discuss the latest evidence and we'll keep the measures we put in place under review.""Speaking at Downing Street, Mr Raab told the public ""we must keep going"" with the lockdown.He said: ""It's been almost three weeks and we're starting to see the impact of the sacrifices we've all made. But the deaths are still rising and we haven't yet reached the peak of the virus. So it's still too early to lift the measures that we put in place.""Given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is            unlikely the restrictions will be lifted any time soon.For a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. •How long do lockdowns last? Countries which acted fastest could be freed firstLess than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""           Business experts have also called for young people, aged between 20 and 30, to be allowed out of lockdown early saying it could help get Britain moving again and avoid an ""extraordinary recession"".The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, the            lockdown in Wuhanfinally ended on April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastWhen the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
337,337,How we live has changed for ever,"April 11, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",876,876,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,SimonKuper,How we live has changed for ever,"I t's as if we've gone from 2020 to 2030 in one weekend,"" Dutch educational innovator Christien Bok told the Volkskrant newspaper. Below I've tried to capture some of the transformations in western societies since March. What follows isn't a catalogue of utopian dreams (though we need those), or shortlived moral awakenings. Rather, it's a list of changes that have actually happened, should last, will save time or money and can mitigate horrors such as carbon emissions, loneliness and homelessness.? Working from home For a week it's an experiment, but after nearly a month it starts to become institutionalised, even in professions that had never contemplated it before. The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have shifted online and bank staffers are executing transactions from home over secure systems. All this has happened unplanned, while many employees are looking after children all day. Homeworking will be easier after the pandemic.If white-collar employees end up working from home just half the week, the fall in commuting would slash emissions, pollution and rush-hour traffic while boosting national happiness. When psychologist Daniel Kahneman and economist Alan Krueger asked 900 Texan women in 2006 to rate their enjoyment of ordinary activities, sex ranked first and commuting last. Morning commutes appeared ""particularly unpleasant"". Ex-commuters would save fortunes on cars, and free up time in manifold ways. Most lowly paid employees - such as cleaners, cashiers and waiters - can't work from home. But if whitecollar workers shift their activity from city centres to residential neighbourhoods, support jobs will follow. Anyone still commuting to downtown will find roads and trains emptier.? Telemedicine The pandemic has sparked an almost instant timesaving revolution in medical care. Telemedicine works ""for most medication refills ... urinary tract infections, colds and rashes, diabetes and hypertension follow-ups, lab results, post-op visits, birth control and fertility, and mental health,"" says the website www.Medicaleconomics.com. Older people - many of whom have undergone an involuntary crash course in video-conferencing - will spend less time in germ-filled waiting rooms.Their children (generally daughters) can sit in on the calls instead of ferrying parents to and from appointments. ? Better hygiene Coronavirus contrarians always point out that the ordinary flu kills thousands too. That's true. However, it isn't a good argument against lockdowns during far deadlier Covid-19. Rather, it's an argument for reducing flu deaths (and misery, and lost working days) in normal times.We now know how to do it: more handwashing; masks and selfisolation for infectious people whenever possible; and better availability of flu vaccines. ? Volunteering When the British government asked for 250,000 volunteers to help the National Health Service during the pandemic, three times that number applied.Some argue that a state service shouldn't need volunteers, at least not in normal times. But we live in a century of unprecedented leisure (chiefly among the over-sixties) and a waning sense of community. Many people would rather help their society than moan about it from the sofa. Volunteering is away to convert leisure into community. It also reduces loneliness, including among volunteers. ? C? Checking on the elderly Even before lockdowns, many older people often went days without speaking to anyone. Now countless WhatsApp groups are reaching out to isolated neighbours. In my building, there's a sign downstairs asking if anyone wants help. In Ireland, postal workers have begun checking on the elderly, asking whether they need food, a pharmacy or away to send messages. After the pandemic, these cost-free systems could allow more people to grow old at home rather than in expensive and often depressing retirement homes.c ? Curbing domestic violence Lockdowns have worsened domestic violence, but have also alerted countries to an eternal plague.France has hurriedly enabled victims to seek help in pharmacies (using code words if necessary) and shopping malls. ? Emptying American jails and housing the homeless Since the 1960s, the US has created a vast government-funded prisonindustrial complex to control poor people, many of them African-Americans. The US incarcerates more inhabitants per capita than any other country, yet still has high rates of violent crime. Now that prisons have become virus incubators, many states are releasing non-violent and elderly offenders. Meanwhile, California has begun using federal funds to house homeless people in hotels and motels. It's also considering buying rooms for the long term. ""This was the crisis we needed to address before the Covid-19 crisis,"" says the state's governor Gavin Newsom. For plutocratic San Francisco to have 8,000 homeless people was a choice. Even leaving aside morality, it's easier for people to deal with addiction and find work once they have a place to live. And the new policy should save California money, given how many emergency room visits the homeless make. Some good ideas really were just lying around waiting to happen.simon.kuper@ft.com'The British cabinet meets on Zoom, court hearings have moved online'",Newspaper
338,338,How we live has changed for ever,"April 11, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",876,876,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,SimonKuper,How we live has changed for ever,"I t's as if we've gone from 2020 to 2030 in one weekend,"" Dutch educational innovator Christien Bok told the Volkskrant newspaper. Below I've tried to capture some of the transformations in western societies since March. What follows isn't a catalogue of utopian dreams (though we need those), or shortlived moral awakenings. Rather, it's a list of changes that have actually happened, should last, will save time or money and can mitigate horrors such as carbon emissions, loneliness and homelessness.? Working from home For a week it's an experiment, but after nearly a month it starts to become institutionalised, even in professions that had never contemplated it before. The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have shifted online and bank staffers are executing transactions from home over secure systems. All this has happened unplanned, while many employees are looking after children all day. Homeworking will be easier after the pandemic.If white-collar employees end up working from home just half the week, the fall in commuting would slash emissions, pollution and rush-hour traffic while boosting national happiness. When psychologist Daniel Kahneman and economist Alan Krueger asked 900 Texan women in 2006 to rate their enjoyment of ordinary activities, sex ranked first and commuting last. Morning commutes appeared ""particularly unpleasant"". Ex-commuters would save fortunes on cars, and free up time in manifold ways. Most lowly paid employees - such as cleaners, cashiers and waiters - can't work from home. But if whitecollar workers shift their activity from city centres to residential neighbourhoods, support jobs will follow. Anyone still commuting to downtown will find roads and trains emptier.? Telemedicine The pandemic has sparked an almost instant timesaving revolution in medical care. Telemedicine works ""for most medication refills ... urinary tract infections, colds and rashes, diabetes and hypertension follow-ups, lab results, post-op visits, birth control and fertility, and mental health,"" says the website www.Medicaleconomics.com. Older people - many of whom have undergone an involuntary crash course in video-conferencing - will spend less time in germ-filled waiting rooms.Their children (generally daughters) can sit in on the calls instead of ferrying parents to and from appointments. ? Better hygiene Coronavirus contrarians always point out that the ordinary flu kills thousands too. That's true. However, it isn't a good argument against lockdowns during far deadlier Covid-19. Rather, it's an argument for reducing flu deaths (and misery, and lost working days) in normal times.We now know how to do it: more handwashing; masks and selfisolation for infectious people whenever possible; and better availability of flu vaccines. ? Volunteering When the British government asked for 250,000 volunteers to help the National Health Service during the pandemic, three times that number applied.Some argue that a state service shouldn't need volunteers, at least not in normal times. But we live in a century of unprecedented leisure (chiefly among the over-sixties) and a waning sense of community. Many people would rather help their society than moan about it from the sofa. Volunteering is away to convert leisure into community. It also reduces loneliness, including among volunteers. ? C? Checking on the elderly Even before lockdowns, many older people often went days without speaking to anyone. Now countless WhatsApp groups are reaching out to isolated neighbours. In my building, there's a sign downstairs asking if anyone wants help. In Ireland, postal workers have begun checking on the elderly, asking whether they need food, a pharmacy or away to send messages. After the pandemic, these cost-free systems could allow more people to grow old at home rather than in expensive and often depressing retirement homes.c ? Curbing domestic violence Lockdowns have worsened domestic violence, but have also alerted countries to an eternal plague.France has hurriedly enabled victims to seek help in pharmacies (using code words if necessary) and shopping malls. ? Emptying American jails and housing the homeless Since the 1960s, the US has created a vast government-funded prisonindustrial complex to control poor people, many of them African-Americans. The US incarcerates more inhabitants per capita than any other country, yet still has high rates of violent crime. Now that prisons have become virus incubators, many states are releasing non-violent and elderly offenders. Meanwhile, California has begun using federal funds to house homeless people in hotels and motels. It's also considering buying rooms for the long term. ""This was the crisis we needed to address before the Covid-19 crisis,"" says the state's governor Gavin Newsom. For plutocratic San Francisco to have 8,000 homeless people was a choice. Even leaving aside morality, it's easier for people to deal with addiction and find work once they have a place to live. And the new policy should save California money, given how many emergency room visits the homeless make. Some good ideas really were just lying around waiting to happen.simon.kuper@ft.com'The British cabinet meets on Zoom, court hearings have moved online'",Newspaper
341,341,SIMON KUPER;OPENING SHOT The pandemic will forever transform how we live,"April 11, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",902,902,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,SIMON KUPEROPENING SHOT The pandemic will forever transform how we live,"It's as if we've gone from 2020 to 2030 in one weekend,"" Dutch educational innovator Christien Bok told the Volkskrant newspaper. Below I've tried to capture some of the transformations in western societies since March. What follows isn't a catalogue of utopian dreams (though we need those), or short-lived moral awakenings. Rather, it's a list of changes that have actually happened, should last, will save time or money and can mitigate horrors such as carbon emissions, loneliness and homelessness. • Working from home. For a week, it's an experiment but, after nearly a month, it starts to become institutionalised, even in professions that had never contemplated it before. The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have shifted online and bank staffers are executing transactions from home over secure systems. All this has happened unplanned, while many employees are looking after children all day. Homeworking will be easier after the pandemic.If white-collar employees end up working from home just half the week, the fall in commuting would slash emissions, pollution and rush-hour traffic while boosting national happiness. When psychologist Daniel Kahneman and economist Alan Krueger asked 900 Texan women in 2006 to rate their enjoyment of ordinary activities, sex ranked first and commuting last. Morning commutes appeared ""particularly unpleasant"". Ex-commuters would save fortunes on cars and free up time in manifold ways.Most lowly paid employees - such as cleaners, cashiers and waiters - can't work from home. But if white-collar workers shift their activity from city centres to residential neighbourhoods, support jobs will follow. Anyone still commuting to downtown will find roads and trains emptier.• Telemedicine. The pandemic has sparked an almost instant time-saving revolution in medical care. Telemedicine works ""for most medication refills… urinary tract infections, colds and rashes, diabetes and hypertension followups, lab results, post-op visits, birth control and fertility, and mental health"", says the website www.Medicaleconomics.com. Older people - many of whom have undergone an involuntary crash course in video-conferencing - will spend less time in germ-filled waiting rooms. Their children (generally daughters) can sit in on the calls instead of ferrying parents to and from appointments. • Better hygiene. Coronavirus contrarians always point out that the ordinary flu kills thousands too. That's true. However, it isn't a good argument against lockdowns during far deadlier Covid-19. Rather, it's an argument for reducing flu deaths (and misery, and lost working days) in normal times. We now know how to do it: more handwashing; masks and self-isolation for infectious people whenever possible; and better availability of flu vaccines.• Volunteering. When the British government asked for 250,000 volunteers to help the National Health Service during the pandemic, three times that number applied.Some argue that a state service shouldn't need volunteers, at least not in normal times. But we live in a century of unprecedented leisure (chiefly among the over-sixties) and a waning sense of community. Many people would rather help their society than moan about it from the sofa. Volunteering is a way to convert leisure into community. It also reduces loneliness, including among volunteers.• Checking on the elderly. Even before lockdowns, many older people often went days without speaking to anyone. Now countless WhatsApp groups are reaching out to isolated neighbours. In my building, there's a sign downstairs asking if anyone wants help. In Ireland, postal workers have begun checking on the elderly, asking whether they need food, a pharmacy or a way to send messages. After the pandemic, these cost-free systems could allow more people to grow old at home rather than in expensive and often depressing retirement homes. • Curbing domestic violence. Lockdowns have worsened domestic violence, but have also alerted countries to an eternal plague. Better late than never, France has hurriedly enabled victims to seek help in pharmacies (using code words if necessary) and shopping malls.• Emptying American jails and housing the homeless. Since the 1960s, the US has created a vast government-funded prison-industrial complex to control poor people, many of them African-Americans. The US incarcerates more inhabitants per capita than any other country, yet still has high rates of violent crime. Now that prisons have become virus incubators, many states are releasing nonviolent and elderly offenders, and arresting fewer new ones.Meanwhile, California has begun using federal funds to house some homeless people in hotels and motels. It's also considering buying rooms for the long term. ""This was the crisis we needed to address before the Covid-19 crisis,"" says the state's governor Gavin Newsom. For plutocratic San Francisco to have 8,000 people living on the streets and in shelters was a choice.Even leaving aside morality, it's easier for people to deal with addiction and find work once they have a place to live. And the new policy should save California money, given how many emergency-room visits the homeless make. Some good ideas really were just lying around waiting to happen.simon.kuper@ft.com @KuperSimon'The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have moved online and bank staffers execute transactions from home'",Newspaper
342,342,SIMON KUPER;OPENING SHOT The pandemic will forever transform how we live,"April 11, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",902,902,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,SIMON KUPEROPENING SHOT The pandemic will forever transform how we live,"It's as if we've gone from 2020 to 2030 in one weekend,"" Dutch educational innovator Christien Bok told the Volkskrant newspaper. Below I've tried to capture some of the transformations in western societies since March. What follows isn't a catalogue of utopian dreams (though we need those), or short-lived moral awakenings. Rather, it's a list of changes that have actually happened, should last, will save time or money and can mitigate horrors such as carbon emissions, loneliness and homelessness. • Working from home. For a week, it's an experiment but, after nearly a month, it starts to become institutionalised, even in professions that had never contemplated it before. The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have shifted online and bank staffers are executing transactions from home over secure systems. All this has happened unplanned, while many employees are looking after children all day. Homeworking will be easier after the pandemic.If white-collar employees end up working from home just half the week, the fall in commuting would slash emissions, pollution and rush-hour traffic while boosting national happiness. When psychologist Daniel Kahneman and economist Alan Krueger asked 900 Texan women in 2006 to rate their enjoyment of ordinary activities, sex ranked first and commuting last. Morning commutes appeared ""particularly unpleasant"". Ex-commuters would save fortunes on cars and free up time in manifold ways.Most lowly paid employees - such as cleaners, cashiers and waiters - can't work from home. But if white-collar workers shift their activity from city centres to residential neighbourhoods, support jobs will follow. Anyone still commuting to downtown will find roads and trains emptier.• Telemedicine. The pandemic has sparked an almost instant time-saving revolution in medical care. Telemedicine works ""for most medication refills… urinary tract infections, colds and rashes, diabetes and hypertension followups, lab results, post-op visits, birth control and fertility, and mental health"", says the website www.Medicaleconomics.com. Older people - many of whom have undergone an involuntary crash course in video-conferencing - will spend less time in germ-filled waiting rooms. Their children (generally daughters) can sit in on the calls instead of ferrying parents to and from appointments. • Better hygiene. Coronavirus contrarians always point out that the ordinary flu kills thousands too. That's true. However, it isn't a good argument against lockdowns during far deadlier Covid-19. Rather, it's an argument for reducing flu deaths (and misery, and lost working days) in normal times. We now know how to do it: more handwashing; masks and self-isolation for infectious people whenever possible; and better availability of flu vaccines.• Volunteering. When the British government asked for 250,000 volunteers to help the National Health Service during the pandemic, three times that number applied.Some argue that a state service shouldn't need volunteers, at least not in normal times. But we live in a century of unprecedented leisure (chiefly among the over-sixties) and a waning sense of community. Many people would rather help their society than moan about it from the sofa. Volunteering is a way to convert leisure into community. It also reduces loneliness, including among volunteers.• Checking on the elderly. Even before lockdowns, many older people often went days without speaking to anyone. Now countless WhatsApp groups are reaching out to isolated neighbours. In my building, there's a sign downstairs asking if anyone wants help. In Ireland, postal workers have begun checking on the elderly, asking whether they need food, a pharmacy or a way to send messages. After the pandemic, these cost-free systems could allow more people to grow old at home rather than in expensive and often depressing retirement homes. • Curbing domestic violence. Lockdowns have worsened domestic violence, but have also alerted countries to an eternal plague. Better late than never, France has hurriedly enabled victims to seek help in pharmacies (using code words if necessary) and shopping malls.• Emptying American jails and housing the homeless. Since the 1960s, the US has created a vast government-funded prison-industrial complex to control poor people, many of them African-Americans. The US incarcerates more inhabitants per capita than any other country, yet still has high rates of violent crime. Now that prisons have become virus incubators, many states are releasing nonviolent and elderly offenders, and arresting fewer new ones.Meanwhile, California has begun using federal funds to house some homeless people in hotels and motels. It's also considering buying rooms for the long term. ""This was the crisis we needed to address before the Covid-19 crisis,"" says the state's governor Gavin Newsom. For plutocratic San Francisco to have 8,000 people living on the streets and in shelters was a choice.Even leaving aside morality, it's easier for people to deal with addiction and find work once they have a place to live. And the new policy should save California money, given how many emergency-room visits the homeless make. Some good ideas really were just lying around waiting to happen.simon.kuper@ft.com @KuperSimon'The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have moved online and bank staffers execute transactions from home'",Newspaper
343,343,SIMON KUPER;OPENING SHOT The pandemic will forever transform how we live,"April 11, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",902,902,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,SIMON KUPEROPENING SHOT The pandemic will forever transform how we live,"It's as if we've gone from 2020 to 2030 in one weekend,"" Dutch educational innovator Christien Bok told the Volkskrant newspaper. Below I've tried to capture some of the transformations in western societies since March. What follows isn't a catalogue of utopian dreams (though we need those), or short-lived moral awakenings. Rather, it's a list of changes that have actually happened, should last, will save time or money and can mitigate horrors such as carbon emissions, loneliness and homelessness. • Working from home. For a week, it's an experiment but, after nearly a month, it starts to become institutionalised, even in professions that had never contemplated it before. The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have shifted online and bank staffers are executing transactions from home over secure systems. All this has happened unplanned, while many employees are looking after children all day. Homeworking will be easier after the pandemic.If white-collar employees end up working from home just half the week, the fall in commuting would slash emissions, pollution and rush-hour traffic while boosting national happiness. When psychologist Daniel Kahneman and economist Alan Krueger asked 900 Texan women in 2006 to rate their enjoyment of ordinary activities, sex ranked first and commuting last. Morning commutes appeared ""particularly unpleasant"". Ex-commuters would save fortunes on cars and free up time in manifold ways.Most lowly paid employees - such as cleaners, cashiers and waiters - can't work from home. But if white-collar workers shift their activity from city centres to residential neighbourhoods, support jobs will follow. Anyone still commuting to downtown will find roads and trains emptier.• Telemedicine. The pandemic has sparked an almost instant time-saving revolution in medical care. Telemedicine works ""for most medication refills… urinary tract infections, colds and rashes, diabetes and hypertension followups, lab results, post-op visits, birth control and fertility, and mental health"", says the website www.Medicaleconomics.com. Older people - many of whom have undergone an involuntary crash course in video-conferencing - will spend less time in germ-filled waiting rooms. Their children (generally daughters) can sit in on the calls instead of ferrying parents to and from appointments. • Better hygiene. Coronavirus contrarians always point out that the ordinary flu kills thousands too. That's true. However, it isn't a good argument against lockdowns during far deadlier Covid-19. Rather, it's an argument for reducing flu deaths (and misery, and lost working days) in normal times. We now know how to do it: more handwashing; masks and self-isolation for infectious people whenever possible; and better availability of flu vaccines.• Volunteering. When the British government asked for 250,000 volunteers to help the National Health Service during the pandemic, three times that number applied.Some argue that a state service shouldn't need volunteers, at least not in normal times. But we live in a century of unprecedented leisure (chiefly among the over-sixties) and a waning sense of community. Many people would rather help their society than moan about it from the sofa. Volunteering is a way to convert leisure into community. It also reduces loneliness, including among volunteers.• Checking on the elderly. Even before lockdowns, many older people often went days without speaking to anyone. Now countless WhatsApp groups are reaching out to isolated neighbours. In my building, there's a sign downstairs asking if anyone wants help. In Ireland, postal workers have begun checking on the elderly, asking whether they need food, a pharmacy or a way to send messages. After the pandemic, these cost-free systems could allow more people to grow old at home rather than in expensive and often depressing retirement homes. • Curbing domestic violence. Lockdowns have worsened domestic violence, but have also alerted countries to an eternal plague. Better late than never, France has hurriedly enabled victims to seek help in pharmacies (using code words if necessary) and shopping malls.• Emptying American jails and housing the homeless. Since the 1960s, the US has created a vast government-funded prison-industrial complex to control poor people, many of them African-Americans. The US incarcerates more inhabitants per capita than any other country, yet still has high rates of violent crime. Now that prisons have become virus incubators, many states are releasing nonviolent and elderly offenders, and arresting fewer new ones.Meanwhile, California has begun using federal funds to house some homeless people in hotels and motels. It's also considering buying rooms for the long term. ""This was the crisis we needed to address before the Covid-19 crisis,"" says the state's governor Gavin Newsom. For plutocratic San Francisco to have 8,000 people living on the streets and in shelters was a choice.Even leaving aside morality, it's easier for people to deal with addiction and find work once they have a place to live. And the new policy should save California money, given how many emergency-room visits the homeless make. Some good ideas really were just lying around waiting to happen.simon.kuper@ft.com @KuperSimon'The British cabinet now meets on Zoom, court hearings have moved online and bank staffers execute transactions from home'",Newspaper
346,346,I've told the government that people under 30 should now be allowed out to work,"April 11, 2020 Saturday",International,The Independent (United Kingdom),651,651,England & Wales,NICK POWDTHAVEE,I've told the government that people under 30 should now be allowed out to work,"The decision to lock down the UK to slow the spread of Covid-19 was undoubtedly the right one to save lives in the short term. However, this strategy carries an enormous cost.Rishi Sunak's Job Retention Scheme to pay the wages of furloughed staff for three months could now cost up to £40bn - and that is just the tip of the iceberg.The UK lockdown is causing severe damage to unemployment rates, future salaries and levels of national debt. The UK is hurtling towards an extraordinary recession that will potentially cost many lives. Unless a vaccine is discovered quickly, there is no pain-free way forward. Sooner, rather than later, we need an exit strategy that balances epidemiology and the economy to minimise all the risks.One approach would be a staggered release, starting with 20- to 30-year-olds.There would be many advantages to such a strategy. These young adults are, statistically speaking, less likely to suffer severe symptoms as a result of Covid-19, making them the safest among us. At the same time, they are more likely to be the hardest hit by the economic consequences of a prolonged lockdown and face a future paying off the country's enormous debts. Evidence also suggests that they are more likely to grow restless as the lockdown drags on and defy the restrictions, potentially sparking a domino effect that puts many thousands more people at risk.Allowing these young adults to resume their lives, largely unrestricted, raises obvious concerns that they might infect their parents and other more vulnerable members of society. Therefore, only those who do not live with older citizens could be released. Even so, this would allow 4.2 million people to return to work, forming a mini-economy run by, and for, the young.Data we harvested from the Annual Population Survey reveals that approximately 2.6 million of those are employed in the private sector. They would be more likely to lose their jobs if the lockdown continued, but would help to stimulate the economy if allowed to resume work. Given that the average weekly income for workers in this age group is £386.28, preventing half of them losing their jobs would bolster the economy by £13bn a year.There is no reason why only the young should benefit. Many older, more experienced staff could continue to work from the safety of their own homes, providing mentoring and managerial support to their younger colleagues using Zoom, Skype, or Facetime.Such a strategy is not without risk, of course. There would still be those who tragically lose their lives as a result. The estimated fatality rate for coronavirus patients aged 20-29 is 0.03 per cent, while twice that number need critical care. Based on those figures, lifting the lockdown on young adults might result in an additional 630 premature deaths and create significant pressure on the NHS. However, the effects would be far smaller than releasing the wider population.Another challenge would be enforcing the new restrictions to ensure only those aged under 30 left their home amid likely resentment from other age groups. The police would need powers to stop and fine older adults who breached the lockdown. However, such draconian measures are already in place in the UK and many other countries.Politicians would have to explain to the rest of the population the logic behind releasing young adults first, offering them hope that this staggered approach would help them regain their own freedom. This could be accelerated by antibody testing to identify those who have developed an immunity to the disease and are safe to be released.In this way UK society and the economy might begin to move forward in the footsteps of the young, setting an example for other countries to follow.Nick Powdthavee is professor of behavioural economics at Warwick Business School and the author of 'The Happiness Equation: The Surprising Economics of Our Most Valuable Asset'",Newspaper
352,352,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;As the UK approaches three weeks of lockdown, Dominic Raab has said it is ""too early"" to start lifting restrictions","April 12, 2020 Sunday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1410,1410,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?As the UK approaches three weeks of lockdown, Dominic Raab has said it is ""too early"" to start lifting restrictions","On 23 March, Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            coronavirus.At the time, The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed. On Thursday 9 April, Dominic Raab, deputising for Boris Johnson, said that the lockdown measures will ""have to stay in place until we've got the evidence that clearly shows we've moved beyond the peak"" when asked whether the Government had decided to extend the rules.Mr Raab also said: ""SAGE will meet next week to discuss the latest evidence and we'll keep the measures we put in place under review.""Speaking at Downing Street, Mr Raab told the public ""we must keep going"" with the lockdown.He said: ""It's been almost three weeks and we're starting to see the impact of the sacrifices we've all made. But the deaths are still rising and we haven't yet reached the peak of the virus. So it's still too early to lift the measures that we put in place.""Given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is            unlikely the restrictions will be lifted any time soon.For a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. •How long do lockdowns last? Countries which acted fastest could be freed firstLess than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""           Business experts have also called for young people, aged between 20 and 30, to be allowed out of lockdown early saying it could help get Britain moving again and avoid an ""extraordinary recession"".The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, the            lockdown in Wuhanfinally ended on April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastWhen the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
361,361,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;As the UK passes three weeks of lockdown, Dominic Raab has said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 14, 2020 Tuesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1453,1453,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?As the UK passes three weeks of lockdown, Dominic Raab has said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has said that the government does not expect to end the coronavirus lockdown this week as it reviews the impact so far.On 23 March, Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            COVID-19.At the time, The Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed.On Monday 13 April Raab, who is currently deputising for Boris Johnson, said that, while there are signs ""we are starting to win this struggle"", the UK has not yet reached the peak of the virus.Mr Raab has said SAGE will meet this week to ""discuss the latest evidence"", and that the measures put in place will be reviewed every three weeks.""We don't expect to make any changes to measures at that point, and we won't until we are confident, as confident as we can be, that changes can be safely made,"" he said.Sir Patrick Vallance, the government chief scientific adviser, said measures would only be lifted ""when we are firmly on the other side"" of the peak, adding that the UK is likely to see a further increase in deaths later this week.""It would be a complete waste of everything everyone has had to do now"" if the lockdown is lifted too soon, he added.Given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is            unlikely the restrictions will be lifted any time soon.For a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. •How long do lockdowns last? Countries which acted fastest could be freed firstLess than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""           Business experts have also called for young people, aged between 20 and 30, to be allowed out of lockdown early saying it could help get Britain moving again and avoid an ""extraordinary recession"".The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, the            lockdown in Wuhanfinally ended on April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastWhen the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
368,368,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;As the UK passes three weeks of lockdown, Dominic Raab has said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 15, 2020 Wednesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1497,1497,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?As the UK passes three weeks of lockdown, Dominic Raab has said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has said that the government does not expect to end the coronavirus lockdownthis week as it reviews the impact so far.On 23 March, Boris Johnson took the unprecedented step of curtailing individual freedoms to prevent the further spread of            COVID-19.At the time, the Prime Minister said that measures would be in place for three weeks-until April 13-and then reviewed.On Monday 13 April Raab, who is currently deputising for Boris Johnson, said that, while there are signs ""we are starting to win this struggle"", the UK has not yet reached the peak of the virus.On April 15, Professor Chris Whitty, the Chief Medical Officer suggested that coronavirus may be about to peak in the UK, as ministers came under fresh pressure to reveal their plan for ending the lockdown.Mr Raab is expected to announce that social restrictions will stay in place for another three weeks.Mr Raab has said SAGE will meet this week to ""discuss the latest evidence"", and that the measures put in place will be reviewed every three weeks.""We don't expect to make any changes to measures at that point, and we won't until we are confident, as confident as we can be, that changes can be safely made,"" he said.Sir Patrick Vallance, the government chief scientific adviser, said measures would only be lifted ""when we are firmly on the other side"" of the peak, adding that the UK is likely to see a further increase in deaths later this week.""It would be a complete waste of everything everyone has had to do now"" if the lockdown is lifted too soon, he added.Given the expected trajectory of the disease, and the decisions taken by other countries who are ahead of Britain in terms of virus progression, it is            unlikely the restrictions will be lifted any time soon.For a start, compared to most countries, the UK had a porous and half-hearted beginning to its isolation measures, with seemingly few people choosing to stay inside. •How other countries are ending lockdownLess than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""           Business experts have also called for young people, aged between 20 and 30, to be allowed out of lockdown early saying it could help get Britain moving again and avoid an ""extraordinary recession"".The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside and socialise as the Easter holidays begin.Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, warned that there could be a ""rebellion"" if the measures are enforced for too long. Meanwhile, the            lockdown in Wuhanfinally ended on April 8, a huge milestone for the country and a signal that the crisis-for them at least-is nearing its end. The city in Hubei province was the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak.Yet it took more than two months of extremely draconian restrictions, including travel bans and quarantine zones, to achieve the level of containment seen in Wuhan. Britain is nowhere near that level of lockdown.And the Chinese restrictions were not lifted for more than 12 weeks after the first death, so if Britain follows a similar path, ours may need to be in place until the end of May/early June. Certainly, that is when the Government has said it expects cases to peak and then level out.However, from papers released recently, we know the Government is at least considering restricting movement for the rest of the year.The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, which feeds into the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), proposed that because of the length of the outbreak, parts of the country could be placed in six-month lockdowns at a time, before being allowed more freedom. Professor Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O'Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: ""It must be hoped that such measures will only last a relatively short time.""However, we must be prepared for this not to be the case, and for them to be in place for an extended period.""The next weeks until the Prime Minister's review will be crucial, as the unfolding epidemic will now be seen in real time, rather than through modelling, allowing experts to make more accurate predictions of when it will peak, and finally die away. It is also possible that after three weeks it becomes apparent that the costs to shutting down society far outweigh the benefit of slowing the spread and the government may choose to lift restrictions even before the peak.•Listen to the daily podcastWhen the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
370,370,Modelling the virus;FT BIG READ. CORONAVIRUS ; The British committee of experts Sage was created to keep science and politics separate. But critics say the government pays too much attention to epidemiologists and not enough to other important factors. By Jonathan Ford,"April 16, 2020 Thursday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2349,2349,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Modelling the virusFT BIG READ. CORONAVIRUS ; The British committee of experts Sage was created to keep science and politics separate. But critics say the government pays too much attention to epidemiologists and not enough to other important factors. By Jonathan Ford,"I n the spring of 2001, Britain was wracked by its first large-scale epidemic of foot-and-mouth disease since the late 1960s.The country's livestock farmers were still embroiled in the lockdown that accompanied Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE), a neurological disease of cattle, that would slash beef consumption and exports for a decade.Now they faced the risk of further curbs on animal sales, and the possible mass culling of their herds. Much depended on whether the government got on top of the outbreak fast.Concerned at blithe official statements that the disease was under control, with the implication that aggressive countermeasures would not be needed, one official suggested turning to a novel source to investigate the course of the infection.Sir John Krebs, then chairman of the British Food Standards Agency, encouraged the government's new chief scientific adviser, David King, to recruit epidemiologists at three universities - Imperial College London, Cambridge and Edinburgh - to model the evolution of the disease. It wasn't the first time that computer models had been built to study epidemics. The innovation was to try to do it in real time, in order to guide the response.The independent modellers quickly exploded the government's optimistic assumptions, showing the outbreak was on course to be far larger, and to spread faster, than officials expected. The government ramped up its response, imposing pre-emptive culls inside cordons around infected farmsteads, ultimately slaughtering 6m animals.The extent to which modelling helped remains disputed, with some scientists claiming the intervention led to unnecessary culling. But most studies suggest it led to the outbreak ending earlier, with some scientists claiming that almost 1m fewer animals were slaughtered than if the government's more relaxed stance had run its course.That experience two decades ago has informed the way the government seeks to combat infectious diseases. In the UK one result was the establishment of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), a group of independent scientists and officials presently chaired by chief scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance. Convened periodically to handle specific crises, it has been advising the government on the coronavirus pandemic. Its proponents claim this system has brought rigour to government decisionmaking that was sometimes absent in the past, mainly by separating science from politics.Sir David points to a notorious incident in May 1990 during the BSE crisis, when the agriculture minister, John Gummer, fed his four-year-old daughter a hamburger at the height of concerns over the risk of the disease being transmitted to humans, something that scientists were then still investigating. A report suggesting just such a link was published in 1996.The impression from the photo was that economic priorities trumped health concerns. ""As the official report into the crisis suggested, the minister could seem concerned with other things than science, such as a desire to keep the market up for farmers,"" Sir David says.With the coronavirus outbreak, however, that separation between technical advice and politics has itself become contentious. The government stands accused of being too in thrall to science, in particular to epidemiologists, and of paying insufficient attention to other important factors such as the economy and behavioural science.John Ashton, a regional director at Public Health England, has talked about the government treating its favoured epidemiologists as ""demigods"".Even Mark Woolhouse, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at Edinburgh university, while supportive of the lockdown, worries that insufficient attention has been paid to other considerations. ""I am an epidemiologist and I worry that the response is based too much on epidemiology alone,"" he says.Stark conclusions Much of the concern stems from the weight placed by ministers on a report published on March 16 by a team of epidemiologists at Imperial College, London led by Neil Ferguson. Not only did this document warn that, unchecked, the virus could kill 510,000 people, it counselled that even with the government's then preferred strategy of ""mitigation"", more than 250,000 would die, with the National Health Service rapidly becoming wholly overwhelmed.The stark conclusion did not come from Imperial redrawing its model. It was the result of inputting data emerging from the pandemic in Italy, which showed that far more patients than previously estimated required scarce intensive care beds.Prof Ferguson is a big name in epidemiological modelling, with experience dating back to the foot-and-mouth crisis. The Imperial report sent a shockwave through the system in both the UK and the US, leading to the introduction of the present policy of ""social distancing"" and suppression, with its heavy economic and social costs for the public.Just three days beforehand, Sir Patrick had told the country that the aim was ""to reduce the peak [of infection], not suppress it completely"" and that policy was aimed at building ""some kind of herd immunity"". The impression that a mathematical model prompted a government volte face led to a torrent of critical attention on Prof Ferguson and his team.Some scientists point out that the model was originally built for a different disease - influenza. According to Mike Cates, a Cambridge university mathematics professor, ""everyone's conscious of the fact that it has been rapidly converted from a different purpose and wasn't originally designed for this type of virus and this type of transmission"".He is now leading a project sponsored by the Royal Society - the UK's senior scientific academy - to create more diverse modelling groups.Meanwhile, a rival group of academics at Oxford university released a paper seemingly contradicting the conclusions on likely fatalities drawn by Imperial. This was largely because it assumed the disease had been in circulation longer, and had therefore already infected a larger proportion of the British population without leading to substantial numbers of deaths.Sage advice An ad hoc group, Sage is assembled to meet specific crises. When it comes to infectious diseases, the group sifts data funnelled to it from three subcommittees. One, known as Nervtag, looks at the threat from emerging outbreaks. There is another specialising in modelling called SPI-M, and a behavioural group, or SPI-B. There is overlap between these bodies. For instance, Prof Ferguson sits on Nervtag, SPI-M and Sage itself.One of the concerns about Sage is that it does not disclose its full membership. The explanation given is that it is a shifting cast of experts that moves depending on the task to be tackled. But anonymity makes it hard to know whether its deliberations could be dominated by any one scientific constituency.Sir David worries that there could be a cost in terms of public confidence: ""I simply cannot see the argument for not knowing who the members of Sage are.""Sage members deny it is some sort of modeller's clique. John Edmunds, a professor of infectious modelling at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, who sits on the committee, as well as Nervtag and SPI-M, says it receives contributions from a number of disciplines from virologists to clinicians and behavioural scientists. What seems clear though is that modelling moved up the agenda from late February when the rapid spread of the virus became apparent. That is when this sort of data became the main focus of attention. ""Until that point, we weren't even asked to model the idea of a total lockdown,"" says Prof Edmunds. ""It was only when Italy started to look totally horrific that those sorts of policy options suddenly opened up.""Concerns about the validity of models are not a new feature of public health crises. From their first live deployment in 2001 they have been contentious.Used in 2001 to inform national rules about prophylactic culling in areas deemed at risk of foot-and-mouth, the models infuriated farmers who believed their livestock was healthy. Michael Thrusfield, an expert in animal diseases, later claimed that Prof Ferguson's modelling was ""not fit for purpose"" and led to the unnecessary deaths of animals. While many authorities are more sympathetic to Prof Ferguson, the counterfactual is hard to prove.There was a similar dispute after the 2009 swine flu outbreak when advice based on Imperial's model was made public by ministers. This described a ""reasonable worst-case scenario"" in which there could be 65,000 deaths. In practise, there were only 457.A later official report from Deirdre Hine, a Welsh physician and former chair of the Commission for Health Improvement, cleared everyone of overreacting, despite the consequent expenditure of £1.2bn on flu remedies that were not needed.""When you have a chip pan fire in the kitchen and, because you have a fire blanket and a smoke alarm, damage to the kitchen is minimal and to the rest of the house is non-existent, you don't thereafter throw out your insurance,"" Dame Deirdre said.She did, however, warn about Sage putting too much weight on the ""academic scientific viewpoint - the modelling activity - to the exclusion of views from those involved in operational epidemiology"", such as public health experts and people in the clinical front line. She also urged the government to make sure its response was flexible because future pandemics would not spread evenly but would be concentrated in certain ""hotspots"". This argued against a single response.One scientist who believes the committee discarded Dame Deirdre's advice not to ""model watch"" is Anthony Costello, a public health specialist at University College London. He claims that too little attention was paid to public health measures that could have softened the lockdown.In particular he argues that identification of cases and contact tracing was abandoned too quickly in favour of the blunderbuss of social distancing. Not only has this shut down large parts of the economy, it leaves the UK prone to a recurrence of the disease whenever restrictions are lifted because so few may be immune. ""The lockdown was right in London and other places where it was clearly running out of control, but in other places you could have tried to contain it,"" he says.Even with a shortage of testing equipment, Prof Costello argues that the government could have ramped up ""symptomatic case definition"" - identifying diagnosable cases and tracking who those people had had contact with. King's College London has produced a simple app, Covid Symptom Tracker, which assists with recording diagnoses.He cites some work from Paul Romer, an American economist, who has modelled the relative outcomes of quarantining only those who are tested and isolating a random fraction of the population whether they have the virus or not.This showed that while testing-based isolation locked up between 5 and 10 per cent of the population, random isolation needed to sequester more than 50 per cent to suppress the virus by the same amount. ""An economy can survive with 10 per cent of the population in isolation,"" writes Mr Romer. ""It can't survive when 50 per cent is in isolation.""Prof Costello's conclusion is that Sage may be guilty of discarding testing and tracing too quickly. ""We've been running this epidemic like Robert McNamara, the US defence secretary in the Vietnam war, who collected vast quantities of data to assess the war's progress,"" he says. ""We should have been more like the other side, fighting a guerrilla war against the virus.""Hunt the virus These debates are resurfacing as the government contemplates exit strategies. There is no certainty that an effective vaccine will be available quickly. Other treatments may come sooner, but to end the lockdown in their absence, hard choices will need to be faced.One is to use social distancing to drive the virus to very low levels, and then lift isolation while using testing and contact tracing to play ""hunt the virus"". This is not simple. ""The big questions are how low is low enough, and how long it may take to get there,"" says Prof Woolhouse. ""We are hoping the virus will enter the down phase in the next few weeks, but we don't know how fast that will be.""It also requires a commitment to ramp up testing to levels where such a strategy is feasible. Prof Edmunds questions whether this can be done. ""The data requirements would be enormous,"" he says. ""It would be very hard to operationalise.""The second is to raise NHS capacity rapidly, using the lockdown to create new intensive care units. This could be accompanied by partial lifting of the lockdown, perhaps leaving the elderly and vulnerable in isolation while releasing more of the young to return to work. Once again considerable testing and tracing will be required as many will remain susceptible.Experts agree there will be no return to normal without effective treatment. ""The only real way out is waiting for a vaccine,"" says Prof Woolhouse.The crisis may not be over, but already there are lessons. Perhaps the biggest one, according to Sir David, is to bolster resilience against future outbreaks. As chief scientific adviser between 2000 and 2008, he pushed the idea of the UK becoming more serious about preparing for emerging health and environmental threats.""We seem to have forgotten the lessons, the fact that we need redundancy against all the things we haven't prepared for,"" he says.The current crisis shows how a lack of preparation ultimately limits a country's options. ""When it came to footand-mouth and Sars, we used to be the ones telling China how to respond, but now the boot is on the other foot. The Asians are in the lead and they've responded well. We've done poorly.""'The lockdown was right in London and other places where it was clearly out of control, but in other places you could have tried to contain it' Anthony Costello, UCL'I am an epidemiologist and I worry that the response is based too much on epidemiology alone' Mark Woolhouse, Edinburgh university",Newspaper
371,371,Modelling the virus;FT BIG READ. CORONAVIRUS ; The British committee of experts Sage was created to keep science and politics separate. But critics say the government pays too much attention to epidemiologists and not enough to other important factors. By Jonathan Ford,"April 16, 2020 Thursday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2349,2349,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Modelling the virusFT BIG READ. CORONAVIRUS ; The British committee of experts Sage was created to keep science and politics separate. But critics say the government pays too much attention to epidemiologists and not enough to other important factors. By Jonathan Ford,"I n the spring of 2001, Britain was wracked by its first large-scale epidemic of foot-and-mouth disease since the late 1960s.The country's livestock farmers were still embroiled in the lockdown that accompanied Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE), a neurological disease of cattle, that would slash beef consumption and exports for a decade.Now they faced the risk of further curbs on animal sales, and the possible mass culling of their herds. Much depended on whether the government got on top of the outbreak fast.Concerned at blithe official statements that the disease was under control, with the implication that aggressive countermeasures would not be needed, one official suggested turning to a novel source to investigate the course of the infection.Sir John Krebs, then chairman of the British Food Standards Agency, encouraged the government's new chief scientific adviser, David King, to recruit epidemiologists at three universities - Imperial College London, Cambridge and Edinburgh - to model the evolution of the disease. It wasn't the first time that computer models had been built to study epidemics. The innovation was to try to do it in real time, in order to guide the response.The independent modellers quickly exploded the government's optimistic assumptions, showing the outbreak was on course to be far larger, and to spread faster, than officials expected. The government ramped up its response, imposing pre-emptive culls inside cordons around infected farmsteads, ultimately slaughtering 6m animals.The extent to which modelling helped remains disputed, with some scientists claiming the intervention led to unnecessary culling. But most studies suggest it led to the outbreak ending earlier, with some scientists claiming that almost 1m fewer animals were slaughtered than if the government's more relaxed stance had run its course.That experience two decades ago has informed the way the government seeks to combat infectious diseases. In the UK one result was the establishment of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), a group of independent scientists and officials presently chaired by chief scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance. Convened periodically to handle specific crises, it has been advising the government on the coronavirus pandemic. Its proponents claim this system has brought rigour to government decisionmaking that was sometimes absent in the past, mainly by separating science from politics.Sir David points to a notorious incident in May 1990 during the BSE crisis, when the agriculture minister, John Gummer, fed his four-year-old daughter a hamburger at the height of concerns over the risk of the disease being transmitted to humans, something that scientists were then still investigating. A report suggesting just such a link was published in 1996.The impression from the photo was that economic priorities trumped health concerns. ""As the official report into the crisis suggested, the minister could seem concerned with other things than science, such as a desire to keep the market up for farmers,"" Sir David says.With the coronavirus outbreak, however, that separation between technical advice and politics has itself become contentious. The government stands accused of being too in thrall to science, in particular to epidemiologists, and of paying insufficient attention to other important factors such as the economy and behavioural science.John Ashton, a regional director at Public Health England, has talked about the government treating its favoured epidemiologists as ""demigods"".Even Mark Woolhouse, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at Edinburgh university, while supportive of the lockdown, worries that insufficient attention has been paid to other considerations. ""I am an epidemiologist and I worry that the response is based too much on epidemiology alone,"" he says.Stark conclusions Much of the concern stems from the weight placed by ministers on a report published on March 16 by a team of epidemiologists at Imperial College, London led by Neil Ferguson. Not only did this document warn that, unchecked, the virus could kill 510,000 people, it counselled that even with the government's then preferred strategy of ""mitigation"", more than 250,000 would die, with the National Health Service rapidly becoming wholly overwhelmed.The stark conclusion did not come from Imperial redrawing its model. It was the result of inputting data emerging from the pandemic in Italy, which showed that far more patients than previously estimated required scarce intensive care beds.Prof Ferguson is a big name in epidemiological modelling, with experience dating back to the foot-and-mouth crisis. The Imperial report sent a shockwave through the system in both the UK and the US, leading to the introduction of the present policy of ""social distancing"" and suppression, with its heavy economic and social costs for the public.Just three days beforehand, Sir Patrick had told the country that the aim was ""to reduce the peak [of infection], not suppress it completely"" and that policy was aimed at building ""some kind of herd immunity"". The impression that a mathematical model prompted a government volte face led to a torrent of critical attention on Prof Ferguson and his team.Some scientists point out that the model was originally built for a different disease - influenza. According to Mike Cates, a Cambridge university mathematics professor, ""everyone's conscious of the fact that it has been rapidly converted from a different purpose and wasn't originally designed for this type of virus and this type of transmission"".He is now leading a project sponsored by the Royal Society - the UK's senior scientific academy - to create more diverse modelling groups.Meanwhile, a rival group of academics at Oxford university released a paper seemingly contradicting the conclusions on likely fatalities drawn by Imperial. This was largely because it assumed the disease had been in circulation longer, and had therefore already infected a larger proportion of the British population without leading to substantial numbers of deaths.Sage advice An ad hoc group, Sage is assembled to meet specific crises. When it comes to infectious diseases, the group sifts data funnelled to it from three subcommittees. One, known as Nervtag, looks at the threat from emerging outbreaks. There is another specialising in modelling called SPI-M, and a behavioural group, or SPI-B. There is overlap between these bodies. For instance, Prof Ferguson sits on Nervtag, SPI-M and Sage itself.One of the concerns about Sage is that it does not disclose its full membership. The explanation given is that it is a shifting cast of experts that moves depending on the task to be tackled. But anonymity makes it hard to know whether its deliberations could be dominated by any one scientific constituency.Sir David worries that there could be a cost in terms of public confidence: ""I simply cannot see the argument for not knowing who the members of Sage are.""Sage members deny it is some sort of modeller's clique. John Edmunds, a professor of infectious modelling at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, who sits on the committee, as well as Nervtag and SPI-M, says it receives contributions from a number of disciplines from virologists to clinicians and behavioural scientists. What seems clear though is that modelling moved up the agenda from late February when the rapid spread of the virus became apparent. That is when this sort of data became the main focus of attention. ""Until that point, we weren't even asked to model the idea of a total lockdown,"" says Prof Edmunds. ""It was only when Italy started to look totally horrific that those sorts of policy options suddenly opened up.""Concerns about the validity of models are not a new feature of public health crises. From their first live deployment in 2001 they have been contentious.Used in 2001 to inform national rules about prophylactic culling in areas deemed at risk of foot-and-mouth, the models infuriated farmers who believed their livestock was healthy. Michael Thrusfield, an expert in animal diseases, later claimed that Prof Ferguson's modelling was ""not fit for purpose"" and led to the unnecessary deaths of animals. While many authorities are more sympathetic to Prof Ferguson, the counterfactual is hard to prove.There was a similar dispute after the 2009 swine flu outbreak when advice based on Imperial's model was made public by ministers. This described a ""reasonable worst-case scenario"" in which there could be 65,000 deaths. In practise, there were only 457.A later official report from Deirdre Hine, a Welsh physician and former chair of the Commission for Health Improvement, cleared everyone of overreacting, despite the consequent expenditure of £1.2bn on flu remedies that were not needed.""When you have a chip pan fire in the kitchen and, because you have a fire blanket and a smoke alarm, damage to the kitchen is minimal and to the rest of the house is non-existent, you don't thereafter throw out your insurance,"" Dame Deirdre said.She did, however, warn about Sage putting too much weight on the ""academic scientific viewpoint - the modelling activity - to the exclusion of views from those involved in operational epidemiology"", such as public health experts and people in the clinical front line. She also urged the government to make sure its response was flexible because future pandemics would not spread evenly but would be concentrated in certain ""hotspots"". This argued against a single response.One scientist who believes the committee discarded Dame Deirdre's advice not to ""model watch"" is Anthony Costello, a public health specialist at University College London. He claims that too little attention was paid to public health measures that could have softened the lockdown.In particular he argues that identification of cases and contact tracing was abandoned too quickly in favour of the blunderbuss of social distancing. Not only has this shut down large parts of the economy, it leaves the UK prone to a recurrence of the disease whenever restrictions are lifted because so few may be immune. ""The lockdown was right in London and other places where it was clearly running out of control, but in other places you could have tried to contain it,"" he says.Even with a shortage of testing equipment, Prof Costello argues that the government could have ramped up ""symptomatic case definition"" - identifying diagnosable cases and tracking who those people had had contact with. King's College London has produced a simple app, Covid Symptom Tracker, which assists with recording diagnoses.He cites some work from Paul Romer, an American economist, who has modelled the relative outcomes of quarantining only those who are tested and isolating a random fraction of the population whether they have the virus or not.This showed that while testing-based isolation locked up between 5 and 10 per cent of the population, random isolation needed to sequester more than 50 per cent to suppress the virus by the same amount. ""An economy can survive with 10 per cent of the population in isolation,"" writes Mr Romer. ""It can't survive when 50 per cent is in isolation.""Prof Costello's conclusion is that Sage may be guilty of discarding testing and tracing too quickly. ""We've been running this epidemic like Robert McNamara, the US defence secretary in the Vietnam war, who collected vast quantities of data to assess the war's progress,"" he says. ""We should have been more like the other side, fighting a guerrilla war against the virus.""Hunt the virus These debates are resurfacing as the government contemplates exit strategies. There is no certainty that an effective vaccine will be available quickly. Other treatments may come sooner, but to end the lockdown in their absence, hard choices will need to be faced.One is to use social distancing to drive the virus to very low levels, and then lift isolation while using testing and contact tracing to play ""hunt the virus"". This is not simple. ""The big questions are how low is low enough, and how long it may take to get there,"" says Prof Woolhouse. ""We are hoping the virus will enter the down phase in the next few weeks, but we don't know how fast that will be.""It also requires a commitment to ramp up testing to levels where such a strategy is feasible. Prof Edmunds questions whether this can be done. ""The data requirements would be enormous,"" he says. ""It would be very hard to operationalise.""The second is to raise NHS capacity rapidly, using the lockdown to create new intensive care units. This could be accompanied by partial lifting of the lockdown, perhaps leaving the elderly and vulnerable in isolation while releasing more of the young to return to work. Once again considerable testing and tracing will be required as many will remain susceptible.Experts agree there will be no return to normal without effective treatment. ""The only real way out is waiting for a vaccine,"" says Prof Woolhouse.The crisis may not be over, but already there are lessons. Perhaps the biggest one, according to Sir David, is to bolster resilience against future outbreaks. As chief scientific adviser between 2000 and 2008, he pushed the idea of the UK becoming more serious about preparing for emerging health and environmental threats.""We seem to have forgotten the lessons, the fact that we need redundancy against all the things we haven't prepared for,"" he says.The current crisis shows how a lack of preparation ultimately limits a country's options. ""When it came to footand-mouth and Sars, we used to be the ones telling China how to respond, but now the boot is on the other foot. The Asians are in the lead and they've responded well. We've done poorly.""'The lockdown was right in London and other places where it was clearly out of control, but in other places you could have tried to contain it' Anthony Costello, UCL'I am an epidemiologist and I worry that the response is based too much on epidemiology alone' Mark Woolhouse, Edinburgh university",Newspaper
377,377,Hundreds of extra deaths not linked to Covid-19,"April 16, 2020 Thursday",International,The Times (London),356,356,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Hundreds of extra deaths not linked to Covid-19,"The collateral damage from Scotland's lockdown has grown after hundreds more people died unexpectedly last week (Mark McLaughlin and Arthi Nachiappan write).Public health experts were shocked to find an additional 364 deaths in the first week of April that were not attributed to Covid-19. National Records of Scotland published its second weekly coronavirus bulletin yesterday, which revealed an excess 251 deaths.There have now been 1,515 more deaths under lockdown than in an average April. Only 962 have been attributed to Covid-19.Nicola Sturgeon admitted that she faced a ""horrendously difficult challenge"" in weighing the costs of the lockdown in lives and economic hardship with the inevitable deaths from Covid-19 that will result if she lifts the restrictions. The first minister said yesterday that it would be vital to understand the reasons behind then extra deaths as the lockdown continues for the foreseeable future, with no sign of a vaccine emerging soon.Linda Bauld, a behavioural scientist at Edinburgh University, raised concerns last week that people were dying at home from heart attacks and other treatable conditions because they did not want to bother GPs. Conditions such as diabetes or high blood pressure are also thought to be harder to manage in lockdown.Professor Bauld also voiced fears that people were drinking themselves to death or committing suicide due to stress of the lockdown and a loss of earnings. Sir Harry Burns, who was chief medical officer for Scotland between 2005-2014, suggested that some of the deaths would be due to organ failure brought on by undiagnosed Covid-19 infections.Yesterday Ms Sturgeon said the rising death rate from non-Covid 19 illnesses was ""still being explored"" and was a global phenomenon.Dr Gregor Smith, the interim chief medical officer for Scotland, said: ""I think it is very likely that we will see a variety of contributing factors rather than one single factor that is producing this very clear excess above what we would expect.""In England and Wales last week there were 6,000 deaths above the five-year average, with 3,475 recorded as related to coronavirus.",Newspaper
381,381,Social distancing likely to go on long after the lockdown,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),800,800,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Social distancing likely to go on long after the lockdown,"The public has the right see an exit strategy from lockdown and official secrecy about it could backfire, the government's chief behavioural science adviser has warned.James Rubin, who chairs the behavioural science committee of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, contradicted ministers' insistence that talking about how restrictions will be eased in future risked undermining the stay-at-home message.Openness about the plan was vital to preserving public trust in ""difficult and costly"" restrictions, Mr Rubin told MPs on the science and technology select committee.Graham Medley, the government's chief pandemic modeller, also warned that there was ""no real answer"" on how to end restrictions, with the only end point to the epidemic being either a vaccine or herd immunity once enough people had been infected.In the meantime the goal had to be to find ways of keeping as few people as possible in quarantine without allowing the outbreak to take off again, he told the committee.Children did not appear to be crucial in spreading the virus but it was not yet clear that schools could safely reopen, Professor Medley added.With lockdown extended for at least three weeks yesterday to allow infections to fall farther, the government has resisted talking about any plans for easing restrictions in the future.Matt Hancock, the health secretary, said doing so risked undermining the clarity of the instruction to stay at home, telling the BBC that government messaging had a ""direct impact"" on cases and deaths. ""The communications are part of the policy, and that is why we will not be distracted into confusing that message,"" he said.""The scientists can say what they like, the commentators can say what they like, the interviewers can say what they like. We will do what is best by dealing with this virus.""However, Mr Rubin, reader in the psychology of health risks at King's College London, told MPs it was ""very important that people have their expectations set on this"".Earlier Neil Ferguson, the scientific adviser to the government whose team provided the modelling that informed the lockdown strategy, said that Britain would need to maintain a ""significant level"" of social distancing even after the lockdown was lifted.Professor Ferguson, of Imperial College London, said measures would have to stay in place until a vaccine became available - unlikely before the second half of 2021 - for the UK to avoid a second outbreak of the coronavirus.The epidemiologist said he believed that the daily number of infections had peaked two weeks ago, but it was ""too early to relax"".Professor Ferguson called for a more co-ordinated exit strategy and said that as restrictions were loosened more testing would be needed to isolate individual cases and trace their contacts.""Our estimates show we have relatively little leeway; if we relax measures too much then we'll see a resurgence of transmission,"" he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. ""If we want to open schools, let people get back to work, then we need to keep transmission down in another manner.""And it's not going to be going back to normal. We will have to maintain some level of social distancing, a significant level, until we have a vaccine available.""Yesterday a three-week extension to the lockdown was announced, along with a series of tests to establish when some easing can begin.Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, has said that his party will back an extension to the lockdown, but he has also urged ministers to set out an exit strategy stating how restrictions will be lifted. Professor Medley, who chairs the SPI-M modelling committee, said Britain was ""stuck here"" in lockdown until a way of easing restrictions could be found that did not restart the epidemic by bringing the ""R value"", the average number of people each person with the infection passes it on to, above one. ""The question is can we find ways in which we have the minimum number of people at home quarantined and still have the R below one. Until we've solved that problem, if we don't want another epidemic then we have to stay in the position we're in,"" he told MPs.Professor Ferguson said he would like to see ""action accelerated"" and called for more infrastructure and an organisation aimed at dealing with the transition to normality.Mr Hancock retorted that Professor Ferguson was not party to the action going on behind the scenes because he was ""not in the government"".Dominic Raab, who is standing in for the prime minister, said that restrictions could begin to be eased once it was clear that the NHS could cope, the death rate was falling in a sustained way, the rate of infection was ""manageable"", there was enough testing and protective equipment, and there was no risk of a second peak.Iain Martin, page 21 Letters, page 22",Newspaper
382,382,Social distancing likely to go on long after the lockdown,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),818,818,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Social distancing likely to go on long after the lockdown,"The public has the right see an exit strategy from lockdown and official secrecy about it could backfire, the government's chief behavioural science adviser has warned.James Rubin, who chairs the behavioural science committee of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, contradicted ministers' insistence that talking about how restrictions will be eased in future risked undermining the stay-at-home message.Openness was vital to preserving trust in ""difficult and costly"" restrictions, Mr Rubin told MPs on the science and technology select committee.Graham Medley, the government's chief pandemic modeller, also warned that there was ""no real answer"" on how to end restrictions, with the only end point to the epidemic being either a vaccine or herd immunity once enough people had been infected.In the meantime the goal had to be to find ways of keeping as few people as possible in quarantine without allowing the outbreak to take off again, he told the committee.Children did not appear to be crucial in spreading the virus but it was not yet clear that schools could safely reopen, Professor Medley added. With lockdown extended for at least three weeks yesterday to allow infections to fall farther, the government has resisted talking about plans for easing restrictions. Nicola Sturgeon raised the prospect this week of indefinite social distancing in Scotland, saying that restrictions on daily life will be the new normal until a vaccine against the virus is developed.Matt Hancock, the health secretary, said doing so risked undermining the clarity of the instruction to stay at home, telling the BBC that government messaging had a ""direct impact"" on cases and deaths. ""The communications are part of the policy, and that is why we will not be distracted into confusing that message,"" he said.""The scientists can say what they like, the commentators can say what they like, the interviewers can say what they like. We will do what is best by dealing with this virus.""However, Mr Rubin, reader in the psychology of health risks at King's College London, told MPs it was ""very important that people have their expectations set on this"".Earlier Neil Ferguson, the scientific adviser to the government whose team provided the modelling that informed the lockdown strategy, said that Britain would need to maintain a ""significant level"" of social distancing even after the lockdown was lifted.Professor Ferguson, of Imperial College London, said measures would have to stay in place until a vaccine became available - unlikely before the second half of 2021 - for the UK to avoid a second outbreak of the coronavirus.The epidemiologist said he believed that the daily number of infections had peaked two weeks ago, but it was ""too early to relax"".Professor Ferguson called for a more co-ordinated exit strategy and said that as restrictions were loosened more testing would be needed to isolate individual cases and trace their contacts. ""Our estimates show we have relatively little leeway; if we relax measures too much then we'll see a resurgence of transmission,"" he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. ""If we want to open schools, let people get back to work, then we need to keep transmission down in another manner. And it's not going to be going back to normal. We will have to maintain some level of social distancing, a significant level, until we have a vaccine available.""Yesterday a three-week extension to the lockdown was announced with tests to establish when easing can start.Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, has said that his party will back an extension to the lockdown, but he has also urged ministers to set out an exit strategy stating how restrictions will be lifted. Professor Medley, who chairs the SPI-M modelling committee, said Britain was ""stuck here"" in lockdown until a way of easing restrictions could be found that did not restart the epidemic by bringing the ""R value"", the average number of people each person with the infection passes it on to, above one. ""The question is can we find ways in which we have the minimum number of people at home quarantined and still have the R below one. Until we've solved that problem, if we don't want another epidemic then we have to stay in the position we're in,"" he told MPs.Professor Ferguson said he would like to see ""action accelerated"" and called for more infrastructure and an organisation to deal with the transition to normality. Mr Hancock retorted that Professor Ferguson was not party to the action behind the scenes because he was ""not in the government"".Dominic Raab, who is standing in for the prime minister, said restrictions could begin to be eased once it was clear that the NHS could cope, the death rate was falling in a sustained way, the infection rate was ""manageable"", there was enough testing and protective kit, and there was no risk of a second peak. Iain Martin, page 21 Letters, page 22",Newspaper
383,383,Social distancing likely to go on long after the lockdown,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),807,807,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Social distancing likely to go on long after the lockdown,"The public has the right to see an exit strategy from lockdown and official secrecy about it could backfire, the government's chief behavioural science adviser has warned.James Rubin, who chairs the behavioural science committee of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, contradicted ministers' insistence that talking about how restrictions will be eased in future risked undermining the stay-at-home message.Openness about the plan was vital to preserving public trust in ""difficult and costly"" restrictions, Mr Rubin told MPs on the science and technology select committee.Graham Medley, the government's chief pandemic modeller, also warned that there was ""no real answer"" on how to end restrictions, with the only end point to the epidemic being either a vaccine or herd immunity once enough people had been infected.In the meantime the goal had to be to find ways of keeping as few people as possible in quarantine without allowing the outbreak to take off again, he told the committee.Children did not appear to be crucial in spreading the virus but it was not yet clear that schools could safely reopen, Professor Medley added.With lockdown extended for at least three weeks yesterday to allow infections to fall farther, the government has resisted talking about any plans for easing restrictions in the future. Neil Ferguson, the adviser whose work formed the basis of the lockdown strategy, said that social distancing would need to be maintained even as restrictions eased.Matt Hancock, the health secretary, said that talking about ending lockdown risked undermining the clarity of the instruction to stay at home, telling the BBC that government messaging had a ""direct impact"" on cases and deaths. ""The communications are part of the policy, and that is why we will not be distracted into confusing that message,"" he said. ""The scientists can say what they like, the commentators can say what they like, the interviewers can say what they like. We will do what is best by dealing with this virus.""However, Dr Rubin, reader in the psychology of health risks at King's College London, told MPs it was ""very important that people have their expectations set on this"".Earlier Professor Ferguson, of Imperial College London, had said that Britain would need to maintain a ""significant level"" of social distancing even after the lockdown was lifted. Measures would have to stay in place until a vaccine was available - unlikely before the second half of 2021 - to avoid a second outbreak of the coronavirus.The epidemiologist said he believed that the daily number of infections had peaked two weeks ago, but it was ""too early to relax"".Professor Ferguson called for a more co-ordinated exit strategy and said that as restrictions were loosened more testing would be needed to isolate individual cases and trace their contacts.""Our estimates show we have relatively little leeway; if we relax measures too much then we'll see a resurgence of transmission,"" he told Today on BBC Radio 4. ""If we want to open schools, let people get back to work, then we need to keep transmission down in another manner.""And it's not going to be going back to normal. We will have to maintain some level of social distancing, a significant level, until we have a vaccine available.""Yesterday a three-week extension to the lockdown was announced, along with a series of tests to establish when some easing can begin.Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, has said that his party will back an extension to the lockdown, but he has also urged ministers to set out an exit strategy stating how restrictions will be lifted. Professor Medley, who chairs the SPI-M modelling committee, said Britain was ""stuck here"" in lockdown until a way of easing restrictions could be found that did not restart the epidemic by bringing the ""R value"", the average number of people each person with the infection passes it on to, above one. ""The question is can we find ways in which we have the minimum number of people at home quarantined and still have the R below one. Until we've solved that problem, if we don't want another epidemic then we have to stay in the position we're in,"" he told MPs.Professor Ferguson said he would like to see ""action accelerated"" and called for more infrastructure and an organisation aimed at dealing with the transition to normality.Mr Hancock retorted that Professor Ferguson was not party to the action going on behind the scenes because he was ""not in the government"".Dominic Raab, who is standing in for the prime minister, said that restrictions could begin to be eased once it was clear that the NHS could cope, the death rate was falling in a sustained way, the rate of infection was ""manageable"", there was enough testing and protective equipment, and there was no risk of a second peak.Iain Martin, page 21 Letters, page 22",Newspaper
384,384,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel';Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),777,777,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Francis Elliott ;Steven Swinford;Chris Smyth,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel'Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"Britain was offered ""light at the end of the tunnel"" at the start of a further three weeks in lockdown with the promise of less social distancing if a five-point test were met.Dominic Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, urged the public to remain patient as he confirmed that the lockdown would remain ""at least"" until May 7 despite signs that the peak of the pandemic was starting to pass.He said that easing the restrictions now would ""risk sacrificing all the progress we have made"" and result in a second wave of infections.Urging the public to show patience and stick with the restrictions to stop the spread of the virus, he said: ""There is light at the end of the tunnel but we are now at both a delicate and a dangerous stage in this pandemic.""He told a Downing Street press conference that the lockdown would not suddenly be lifted next month. ""It could mean relaxing measures in some areas, while strengthening measures in other areas,"" he said, as he set out five tests that would have to be met for restrictions to begin to be relaxed.They are: ensuring that the NHS can cope across Britain; a sustained and consistent fall in the daily death rate; evidence that the rate of infection is decreasing to ""manageable levels""; enough testing and protective equipment to meet demand; and no risk of a second peak large enough to overwhelm the NHS.In other developments: ? Analysis found that one in ten people who have died from coronavirus in England and Wales had no underlying health condition.? Mr Raab said that China would face ""hard questions"" about the source of the pandemic and warned it would not be ""business as usual after the crisis"". ? Ministers ordered 15,000 ventilators to treat coronavirus patients after the first newly adapted device was approved by the regulator.? Tom Moore, a 99-year-old army veteran who set out to raise £1,000 for the NHS by walking round his garden 100 times, achieved more than £15 million in donations.? Downing Street hinted that it supported awarding a collective George Cross to NHS workers in recognition of their role in tackling coronavirus. ? President Trump promised to ease lockdown restrictions as he said the US had ""passed the peak"" of Covid-19 cases.Standing beside Mr Raab, Sir Patrick Vallance, the government's chief scientific adviser, said that the ""reproductive number"" for the virus was now less than one, meaning that for every person with the virus less than one new person was being infected.""The overall message is that new cases are at least flattening and may be decreasing,"" he said, adding: ""Sage [the government's scientific advisers] looked very carefully at all of the evidence and [are] of the opinion that it is highly likely that the R is below one - the transmission force of the virus is below one, meaning that one person will, on average, be infecting fewer than one other person.""That's an important change. It means in the community it's likely that the virus and the epidemic is now shrinking.""Mr Raab said, however, that it was not right to talk about ending the lockdown. ""It would be irresponsible for us to set out in more detail the measures being considered as potential options because we don't have the data yet,"" he said.He refused to outline a timetable for easing restrictions and instead highlighted Mr Johnson's statement on March 19 that it would take 12 weeks to ""turn the tide"". He said: ""The prime minister said at the outset that it would take three months to come through the peak and I think that, broadly, is still the Continued on page 2, col 3 continued from page 1 Five tests to end lockdown outline. We can't give a definitive time frame, that would be to prejudge the evidence ... But our message to the British public is: there is light at the end of the tunnel, we are making progress, but at the same time we must keep up the social-distancing measures.""At Holyrood Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, said that details of Scotland's exit strategy would be published next week.Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said that the capital's residents should wear masks, heaping pressure on ministers to drop the official guidance that does not recommend them. ""The evidence around the world is that [masks are] effective,"" he told the BBC.Ministers' claims that discussing exit strategies was irresponsible drew fire from experts. James Rubin, who chairs the behavioural science committee of Sage, said that openness about the plan was vital for public trust. Dr Rubin, of King's College London, told MPs: ""People need to understand, and have a right to understand, what the plan is.""Reports and analysis, pages 4-13 Leading article, page 23",Newspaper
385,385,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel';Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),787,787,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Francis Elliott,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel'Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"Britain was offered ""light at the end of the tunnel"" at the start of a further three weeks in lockdown with the promise of less social distancing if a five-point test were met.Dominic Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, urged the public to remain patient as he confirmed that the lockdown would remain ""at least"" until May 7 despite signs that the worst of the pandemic was starting to pass.He said that easing the restrictions now would ""risk sacrificing all the progress we have made"" and result in a second wave of infections.Urging the public to show patience and stick with the restrictions to stop the spread of the virus, he said: ""There is light at the end of the tunnel but we are now at both a delicate and a dangerous stage in this pandemic.""He told a Downing Street press conference that the lockdown would not suddenly be lifted next month and could last into June. ""It could mean relaxing measures in some areas, while strengthening measures in other areas,"" he said, as he set out five tests that would have to be met for restrictions to begin to be relaxed.They are: ensuring that the NHS can cope across Britain; a sustained and consistent fall in the daily death rate; evidence that the rate of infection is decreasing to ""manageable levels""; enough testing and protective equipment to meet demand; and no risk of a second peak large enough to overwhelm the NHS.In other developments: ? Analysis found that one in ten people who have died from coronavirus in England and Wales had no underlying health condition.? Mr Raab said that China would face ""hard questions"" about the source of the pandemic and warned it would not be ""business as usual after the crisis"". ? Ministers ordered 15,000 ventilators to treat coronavirus patients after the first newly adapted device was approved by the regulator.? Tom Moore, a 99-year-old army veteran who set out to raise £1,000 for the NHS by walking round his garden 100 times, achieved more than £16 million in donations.? Downing Street hinted that it supported awarding a collective George Cross to NHS workers in recognition of their role in tackling coronavirus.? President Trump promised to ease lockdown restrictions as he said the US had ""passed the peak"" of Covid-19 cases.Standing beside Mr Raab, Sir Patrick Vallance, the government's chief scientific adviser, said that the ""reproductive number"" for the virus was now less than one, meaning that for every person with the virus less than one new person was being infected.""The overall message is that new cases are at least flattening and may be decreasing,"" he said, adding: ""Sage [the government's scientific advisers] looked very carefully at all of the evidence and [are] of the opinion that it is highly likely that the R is below one - the transmission force of the virus is below one, meaning that one person will, on average, be infecting fewer than one other person. That's an important change. It means in the community it's likely that the virus and the epidemic is now shrinking.""Mr Raab said, however, that it was not right to talk about ending the lockdown. ""It would be irresponsible for us to set out in more detail the measures being considered as potential options because we don't have the data yet,"" he said.He refused to outline a timetable for easing restrictions and instead highlighted Mr Johnson's statement on March 19 that it would take 12 weeks to ""turn the tide"". He said: ""The prime minister said at the outset that it would take three months to come through the peak and I think that, broadly, is still the Continued on page 2, col 3 continued from page 1 Five tests to end lockdown outline. We can't give a definitive time frame, that would be to prejudge the evidence ... But our message to the British public is: there is light at the end of the tunnel, we are making progress, but at the same time we must keep up the social-distancing measures.""At Holyrood Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, said that Scotland's exit strategy would be published next week.Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said that the capital's residents should wear masks, heaping pressure on the government to drop official guidance that does not recommend them. ""The evidence around the world is that [masks are] effective,"" he told the BBC. It was reported last night that ministers were considering whether to ask employees to wear masks in the office to allow a widespread return to work.James Rubin, who chairs the behavioural science committee of Sage, criticised the government claim that discussing exit strategies was irresponsible. He told MPs: ""People need to understand, and have a right to understand, what the plan is.""Reports and analysis, pages 4-13 Leading article, page 23",Newspaper
386,386,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel';Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),777,777,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Francis Elliott,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel'Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"Britain was offered ""light at the end of the tunnel"" at the start of a further three weeks in lockdown with the promise of less social distancing if a five-point test were met.Dominic Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, urged the public to remain patient as he confirmed that the lockdown would remain ""at least"" until May 7 despite signs that the peak of the pandemic was starting to pass.He said that easing the restrictions now would ""risk sacrificing all the progress we have made"" and result in a second wave of infections.Urging the public to show patience and stick with the restrictions to stop the spread of the virus, he said: ""There is light at the end of the tunnel but we are now at both a delicate and a dangerous stage in this pandemic.""He told a Downing Street press conference that the lockdown would not suddenly be lifted next month. ""It could mean relaxing measures in some areas, while strengthening measures in other areas,"" he said, as he set out five tests that would have to be met for restrictions to begin to be relaxed.They are: ensuring that the NHS can cope across Britain; a sustained and consistent fall in the daily death rate; evidence that the rate of infection is decreasing to ""manageable levels""; enough testing and protective equipment to meet demand; and no risk of a second peak large enough to overwhelm the NHS.In other developments: ? Analysis found that one in ten people who have died from coronavirus in England and Wales had no underlying health condition.? Mr Raab said that China would face ""hard questions"" about the source of the pandemic and warned it would not be ""business as usual after the crisis"". ? Ministers ordered 15,000 ventilators to treat coronavirus patients after the first newly adapted device was approved by the regulator.? Tom Moore, a 99-year-old army veteran who set out to raise £1,000 for the NHS by walking round his garden 100 times, achieved more than £15 million in donations.? Downing Street hinted that it supported awarding a collective George Cross to NHS workers in recognition of their role in tackling coronavirus. ? President Trump promised to ease lockdown restrictions as he said the US had ""passed the peak"" of Covid-19 cases.Standing beside Mr Raab, Sir Patrick Vallance, the government's chief scientific adviser, said that the ""reproductive number"" for the virus was now less than one, meaning that for every person with the virus less than one new person was being infected.""The overall message is that new cases are at least flattening and may be decreasing,"" he said, adding: ""Sage [the government's scientific advisers] looked very carefully at all of the evidence and [are] of the opinion that it is highly likely that the R is below one - the transmission force of the virus is below one, meaning that one person will, on average, be infecting fewer than one other person.""That's an important change. It means in the community it's likely that the virus and the epidemic is now shrinking.""Mr Raab said, however, that it was not right to talk about ending the lockdown. ""It would be irresponsible for us to set out in more detail the measures being considered as potential options because we don't have the data yet,"" he said.He refused to outline a timetable for easing restrictions and instead highlighted Mr Johnson's statement on March 19 that it would take 12 weeks to ""turn the tide"". He said: ""The prime minister said at the outset that it would take three months to come through the peak and I think that, broadly, is still the Continued on page 2, col 3 continued from page 1 Five tests to end lockdown outline. We can't give a definitive time frame, that would be to prejudge the evidence ... But our message to the British public is: there is light at the end of the tunnel, we are making progress, but at the same time we must keep up the social-distancing measures.""At Holyrood Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, said that details of Scotland's exit strategy would be published next week.Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said that the capital's residents should wear masks, heaping pressure on ministers to drop the official guidance that does not recommend them. ""The evidence around the world is that [masks are] effective,"" he told the BBC.Ministers' claims that discussing exit strategies was irresponsible drew fire from experts. James Rubin, who chairs the behavioural science committee of Sage, said that openness about the plan was vital for public trust. Dr Rubin, of King's College London, told MPs: ""People need to understand, and have a right to understand, what the plan is.""Reports and analysis, pages 4-13 Leading article, page 23",Newspaper
387,387,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel';Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),766,766,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Francis Elliott,Raab points way to 'light at end of the tunnel'Five conditions set before lockdown can be eased,"Britain was offered ""light at the end of the tunnel"" at the start of a further three weeks in lockdown with the promise of reduced social distancing if a five-point test can be met.Dominic Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, urged the public to remain patient as he confirmed that the lockdown will remain ""at least"" until May 7 despite signs that the peak of the pandemic is starting to pass.He said that easing the restrictions now would ""risk sacrificing all the progress we have made"" and result in a second wave of infections. Urging the public to show patience and stick with the restrictions to stop the spread of the virus, he said: ""There is light at the end of the tunnel but we are now at both a delicate and a dangerous stage in this pandemic.""He told a Downing Street press conference that the lockdown would not suddenly be lifted next month. ""It could mean relaxing measures in some areas while strengthening measures in other areas,"" he said, as he set out five tests that would have to be met for restrictions to begin to be relaxed.They are: ensuring that the NHS can cope across Britain; a sustained and consistent fall in the daily death rate; evidence that the rate of infection is decreasing to ""manageable levels""; enough testing and protective equipment to meet demand; and no risk of a second peak large enough to overwhelm the NHS.Nicola Sturgeon, who took part in the Cobra meeting, confirmed that lockdown in Scotland would continue for at least three weeks, echoing Mr Raab's warning about the dangers of lifting restrictions prematurely.The first minister said there was ""positive"" news that social distancing is slowing the spread of the virus but repeated her message that life would not return to normal soon.Scottish government officials were working on an exit strategy, she said, adding that she would outline its principles next week.Professor Jason Leitch, the Scottish government's national clinical director, said that Scotland might take a different approach to the rest of the UK if it was in the country's best interests.In other developments: ? Analysis found that one in ten people who have died from coronavirus in England and Wales had no underlying health condition.? Another 80 deaths in Scotland from the virus were reported yesterday, bringing the total to 779.? Mr Raab said that China would face ""hard questions"" about the source of the pandemic and warned it would not be ""business as usual after the crisis"". ? Ministers ordered 15,000 ventilators to treat coronavirus patients after the first newly adapted device was approved by the regulator.? Tom Moore, a 99-year-old army veteran who set out to raise £1,000 for the NHS by walking round his garden 100 times, achieved more than £15 million in donations.? Downing Street hinted that it supported awarding a collective George Cross to NHS workers in recognition of their role in tackling coronavirus. ? President Trump promised to ease lockdown restrictions as he said the US had ""passed the peak"" of Covid-19 cases.Standing beside Mr Raab, Sir Patrick Vallance, the government's chief scientific adviser, said that the ""reproductive number"" for the virus was now less than one, meaning that for every person with the virus less than one new person was being infected.""The overall message is that new cases are at least flattening and may be decreasing,"" he said, adding: ""Sage [the government's scientific advisers] looked very carefully at all of the evidence and [are] of the opinion that it is highly likely that the R is below one. Continued on page 2, col 3 continued from page 1 Five tests to end lockdown The transmission force of the virus is below one, meaning that one person will, on average, be infecting fewer than one other person.""That's an important change. It means in the community it's likely that the virus and the epidemic is now shrinking.""Mr Raab said, however, that it was not right to talk about ending the lockdown. ""It would be irresponsible for us to set out in more detail the measures being considered as potential options because we don't have the data yet,"" he said. He refused to outline a timetable for easing restrictions and instead highlighted Mr Johnson's statement on March 19 that it would take 12 weeks to ""turn the tide"".However, James Rubin, who chairs the behavioural science committee of Sage, said that openness about the plan was vital for public trust. Dr Rubin, of King's College London, told MPs: ""People need to understand, and have a right to understand, what the plan is.""Reports and analysis, pages 4-13 Leading article, page 23",Newspaper
390,390,BRITAIN'S MOST TRUSTED NATIONAL NEWSPAPER;CORONAVIRUS SUMMARY,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),635,635,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,BRITAIN'S MOST TRUSTED NATIONAL NEWSPAPERCORONAVIRUS SUMMARY,"Hospitals 'there for all' Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, reassured the public that the NHS was ""open for business"" as A&E visits have nearly halved since the coronavirus outbreak began. ""I really must encourage people experiencing life-threatening or life-changing things to go to hospital,"" he said. NHS leaders are concerned that the quality of care being given to seriously ill patients is falling as hospitals struggle with drastically changed conditions that raise ""obvious risks"" of harm. Page 4 Lockdown exit demand The public has the right to see an exit strategy from the lockdown, James Rubin, the government's chief behavioural science adviser, said, as he contradicted ministers' insistence that talking about how restrictions would be eased risked undermining the stay-at-home message. Neil Ferguson, whose team provided the modelling that informed the lockdown strategy, said that Britain would need to maintain a ""significant level"" of social distancing even after the curbs were lifted. Page 6 COMMENT The virus's effect on lungs and the benefits of a fall in pollution are signs that we must go g reen IAIN MARTIN, PAGE 21 Fears over farm workers 26 DAYS LOCKDOWN A flight carrying 147 Romanian seasonal workers has arrived at Stansted airport amid concerns that some may have slipped out of a ""coronavirus red zone"". The flight took off from Iasi airport, 90 miles from the city of Suceava, the centre of Romania's Covid-19 outbreak. The workers will be taken to G's, a fresh-produce supplier in East Anglia, where they will be quarantined in hostels. Page 7 Trump plans to reopen President Trump is preparing to announce a plan to ease America out of lockdown, saying that his guidelines would be ""very exciting"". Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York, said, however, that he was extending the state's shutdown until May 15, in agreement with neighbouring northeastern states. ""What happens after then?"" he said. ""We will see, depending on what the data shows."" Page 12 Very elderly beat virus People in their hundreds have a biological make-up that means they are more likely to survive coronavirus.OF UK Connie Titchen, 106, is the oldest person in Britain known to have recovered. Sarah Harper, a professor of gerontology at Oxford University, said there was some indication that people aged above 105 were ""genetically or biologically different from the rest of the population"". Page 11 UN warns of mutation António Guterres, the UN secretary-general, warned the West that coronavirus could mutate into a form that no vaccine could combat if outbreaks in the developing world were ignored. Taiwanese and Australian researchers have said that a significant mutation of the Covid-19 spike protein in India is an early sign of ways in which the virus could change. Page 13 US job losses near 22m A decade of job creation in the United States has been wiped out as the coronavirus brings the economy to its knees. About 21.8 million people across the country have made new claims for unemployment benefits in the past four weeks, according to a report by the Department of Labor. This eclipsed the 21.7million jobs created between June 2009 and February this year. Page 29 Football talks falter Manchester City, Chelsea, Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur are understood to be among Premier League clubs struggling to reach an agreement with players on the wage cuts or deferrals needed to manage the impact of coronavirus. At this point, only footballers at Southampton and West Ham United have agreed to share the economic burden of the pandemic with their employers. Page 56 COMMENT 19 LETTERS 22 LEADING ARTICLES 23 WORLD 24 BUSINESS 29 REGISTER 36 TV & RADIO 45 SPORT 50 CROSSWORD 56they are survive Connie the some aged above may The to G's, in East 26 DAYS OF UK LOCKDOWN",Newspaper
391,391,BRITAIN'S MOST TRUSTED NATIONAL NEWSPAPER CORONAVIRUS SUMMARY,"April 17, 2020 Friday",International,The Times (London),627,627,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,BRITAIN'S MOST TRUSTED NATIONAL NEWSPAPER CORONAVIRUS SUMMARY,"Dithering' on vulnerable SNP ministers have been accused of ""dithering"" over supermarket access for vulnerable people as it emerged that only one in ten has registered for the scheme. Concern is growing about the system in Scotland after one of the big supermarkets said it had not received a list of vulnerable people. The Scottish government was criticised last week for not having passed on the data almost a week after the UK government provided supermarkets with its register. Page 4 Lockdown exit demand The public has the right to see an exit strategy from the lockdown, James Rubin, the government's chief behavioural science adviser, said, as he contradicted ministers' insistence that talking about how restrictions would be eased risked undermining the stay-at-home message. Neil Ferguson, whose team provided the modelling that informed the lockdown strategy, said that Britain would need to maintain a ""significant level"" of social distancing even after the curbs were lifted. Page 6 COMMENT The virus's effect on lungs and the benefits of a fall in pollution are signs that we must go g reen IAIN MARTIN, PAGE 21 Farms need immigrants 26 DAYS LOCKDOWN Overseas workers must be flown in to prevent Scotland's fruit crops from rotting in the fields, industry leaders have warned. Most of the 10,000 workers who have usually carried out the harvest have returned to eastern Europe because of Brexit, creating a labour shortage compounded by the coronavirus pandemic. NFU Scotland is in talks with the Westminster government. Page 7 Trump plans to reopen President Trump is preparing to announce a plan to ease America out of lockdown, saying that his guidelines would be ""very exciting"". Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York, said, however, that he was extending the state's shutdown until May 15, in agreement with neighbouring northeastern states. ""What happens after then?"" he said. ""We will see, depending on what the data shows."" Page 12 Very elderly beat virus People in their hundreds have a biological make-up that means they are more likely to survive coronavirus.OF UK Connie Titchen, 106, is the oldest person in Britain known to have recovered. Sarah Harper, a professor of gerontology at Oxford University, said there was some indication that people aged above 105 were ""genetically or biologically different from the rest of the population"". Page 11 UN warns of mutation António Guterres, the UN secretary-general, warned the West that coronavirus could mutate into a form that no vaccine could combat if outbreaks in the developing world were ignored. Taiwanese and Australian researchers have said that a significant mutation of the Covid-19 spike protein in India is an early sign of ways in which the virus could change. Page 13 US job losses near 22m A decade of job creation in the United States has been wiped out as the coronavirus brings the economy to its knees. About 21.8 million people across the country have made new claims for unemployment benefits in the past four weeks, according to a report by the Department of Labor. This eclipsed the 21.7million jobs created between June 2009 and February this year. Page 29 Football talks falter Manchester City, Chelsea, Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur are understood to be among Premier League clubs struggling to reach an agreement with players on the wage cuts or deferrals needed to manage the impact of coronavirus. At this point, only footballers at Southampton and West Ham United have agreed to share the economic burden of the pandemic with their employers. Page 56 COMMENT 19 LEADING ARTICLES 23 MARKETS 38-39 REGISTER 45 LAW REPORT 47 WEATHER 49 SPORT 50 CROSSWORD 56 TV & RADIO TIMES2they are survive Connie the some aged above fields, by the NFU 26 DAYS OF UK LOCKDOWN",Newspaper
392,392,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 17, 2020 Friday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1093,1093,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
397,397,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 18, 2020 Saturday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
398,398,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 18, 2020 Saturday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1093,1093,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
404,404,Silence is not acceptable - ministers must tell us the plan;ESTABLISHED 1822,"April 19, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),705,705,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Silence is not acceptable - ministers must tell us the planESTABLISHED 1822,"The coronavirus crisis has led the government to take measures many would have thought impossible in peacetime. Yet when ministers are asked how long this unusual period - this lockdown - will last and what their proposals are for getting out of it, their response is defensive, even shirty. That has to change.The government also needs to show some humility. Journalists have been criticised for asking ""political"" questions at the daily Downing Street press conferences, but that is because, with one or two exceptions, the politicians have been behaving like politicians. While the scientists can admit that the response in other countries has been more timely and effective, ministers find it hard to do so.This weekend, once again, they are getting the headlines they did not want: that frontline NHS staff are being put at risk by a lack of personal protective equipment (PPE). On Friday, Public Health England warned that ""in times of extreme shortages"" healthcare professionals may need to reuse gowns or resort to alternatives. PPE shortages, together with the crisis in care homes, is in danger of creating the impression of political leaders who are not in control of events.The government has been lucky that the public has responded so well to its lockdown message, with only a tiny minority infringing the guidance, given that its messaging before the lockdown had lacked clarity. People have been very grown up - more so than the government and behavioural scientists had expected.Now they need to be treated like adults.The idea that if ministers talk publicly about an exit strategy from the crisis it will dilute the lockdown message is an insult to our intelligence. People can understand the need for the lockdown to continue for a further three weeks, until the peak of the crisis has passed, to prevent NHS critical care from being overwhelmed. Indeed, the public would have reacted against any attempt to end the lockdown too early. There is a contrast here between Britain and some American states, where protesters are agitating for an immediate end to their lockdown.The people of Britain are sensible, but they also need hope. The strains of the lockdown on families are exacerbated by the absence of any word from the government on how it might end. The economy is also crying out for a plan. The Office for Budget Responsibility has sketched out a scenario in which the economy shrinks by 35% in the second quarter, unemployment rises by at least two million and the budget deficit hits more than £270bn this year. The Bank of England will soon provide a similarly gloomy assessment. An exit strategy not only gives people something to hope for but will also be important in containing the permanent economic scarring from this episode. Many businesses have taken advantage of the government's job retention scheme, which pays 80% of the wages of furloughed staff and which has been extended to the end of June. For firms uncertain of when they will be able to resume operations, the furlough, which is costing taxpayers tens of billions, may not be enough. Hence the worries about a big and sustained rise in unemployment lasting well beyond this summer.Today we report that the cabinet is considering a three-phase end to the lockdown. The first, starting next month, would see primary schools reopening, along with classes for pupils sitting GCSEs and A-levels next year. Some non-essential shops would reopen and some elective surgery in the NHS would resume. In the second phase, a few weeks later, more shops and other businesses would reopen, followed later in the summer by pubs and restaurants. The final phase - only after a vaccine has been developed and proved to work, probably next year - would release the vulnerable and the over-70s from the lockdown.It is a plan, the merits of which can be debated, but it is said to be awaiting the return to work of Boris Johnson, without whom big decisions are not being taken. That is wrong. We have a system of cabinet government, not a presidency or a dictatorship. Informing people and businesses of proposed next steps and preparing the ground cannot be determined by the length of the prime minister's convalescence. We have a right to know.",Newspaper
413,413,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 20, 2020 Monday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
417,417,Sprightly Sunak hosts the daily exercise class;Quentin Letts,"April 21, 2020 Tuesday",International,The Times (London),610,610,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Political Sketch,Sprightly Sunak hosts the daily exercise classQuentin Letts,"GAs the chancellor gaily reminded us at yesterday's daily Downing Street deck exercises, we've now been on voyage for a month. Rishi Sunak observed lightly that it was a month since he stood at that same lectern and first announced his coronavirus rescue package for businesses. He's hearty, Rishi. Likes to chivvy us along. Kept saying ""Brilliant!"" yesterday, zipping through his spiel. Slim, spry, he was the embodiment of health and efficiency, lacking only a pair of hoisted-to-the-navel Speedos and a beach ball.Can it really be only a month? The sea is glass. If the horizon changes, it does it on the sly when I'm not looking. The family has bought my mother a Portal video device but she hasn't yet got the hang of its name and calls it ""my porthole"". Somehow that matches the ancient mariner mood.Is that an albatross circling to starboard? Now you mention it, Mr Sunak's strong nose does bear a faint resemblance to an albatross's bill. You might not want to let him near your koi carp pond.This buoyant young chancellor recalled that a month ago he had promised to pay lots of people's wages. Now he was able to say: ""Today we deliver our promise.""He did not despair at the doubloons cascading out of the nation's coffers. That is not the Sunak way. ""We have,"" he declared, ""been sowing the seeds of our recovery!"" He said another £1.25 billion of public money will be spent on innovative firms. Now he was on to stirring stuff about our national innovation agency and how we were going to bounce back, provided we continued to follow lockdown rules and avoided a second peak.Talk of a second peak was, perhaps, a good sign, for it could suggest we have passed the first peak. Not that they like to say that. For all Mr Sunak's virtuous vigour - he is the sort of bloke who has never eaten a whole packet of fig rolls in one sitting and then been consumed by guilt -the good news was still being sharply rationed.The Ministry of Defence's Professor Dame Angela McLean conceded that London hospitalisation rates had now dropped seven days in succession. That was all the statistical optimism we were permitted. One pipette per ocean-full of salted tears.The media were interested in PPE for health workers.Sky's Beth was back (first appearance for ages - did she pull an eyelash muscle with all that mascara?) She waxed on about terror among hospital staff who lacked protective gear. Mr Sunak twice said ""everybody has worked incredibly hard"".This has become a staple of modern politics. Over a billion pieces of PPE had now been delivered, more than 12 million pieces alone on Sunday. Beside him stood Mrs Doyle, the Irish science bod. Poor love, I wish they'd let her sit down. She looks so tired.Professor Peston of ITV treated us to one of his cameos, this time a mere 57 seconds. He peered down into his port hole like some enormous, shaggy cat. Behind him a member of his household was visible. She seemed to be searching for something. A full stop for Robert, perhaps.Then a young thruster from a new magazine for ""the European start-up ecosystem"" came on. He had a big advert for his publication beside him. He wanted to know about ""behavioural modelling"". Dame Angela said she had ""a whole sub-group of behavioural scientists called SpyB"" and they were analysing the public's morale.They should come to Herefordshire. Across the valley here, still lit by late sunshine as I write this, is a field where a neighbour keeps miniature donkeys. When not braying, the little creatures beat their heads and necks against their metal feeding troughs. That's it exactly. That's how the country is feeling. Further research by SpyB seems unnecessar y.",Newspaper
418,418,Sprightly Sunak hosts the daily exercise class;Quentin Letts,"April 21, 2020 Tuesday",International,The Times (London),614,614,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Political Sketch,Sprightly Sunak hosts the daily exercise classQuentin Letts,"reetings, grapple fans.GAs the chancellor gaily reminded us at yesterday's daily Downing Street deck exercises, we've now been on voyage for a month. Rishi Sunak observed lightly that it was a month since he stood at that same lectern and first announced his coronavirus rescue package for businesses. He's hearty, Rishi. Likes to chivvy us along. Kept saying ""Brilliant!"" yesterday, zipping through his spiel. Slim, spry, he was the embodiment of health and efficiency, lacking only a pair of hoisted-to-the-navel Speedos and a beach ball.Can it really be only a month? The sea is glass. If the horizon changes, it does it on the sly when I'm not looking. The family has bought my mother a Portal video device but she hasn't yet got the hang of its name and calls it ""my porthole"". Somehow that matches the ancient mariner mood.Is that an albatross circling to starboard? Now you mention it, Mr Sunak's strong nose does bear a faint resemblance to an albatross's bill. You might not want to let him near your koi carp pond.This buoyant young chancellor recalled that a month ago he had promised to pay lots of people's wages. Now he was able to say: ""Today we deliver our promise.""He did not despair at the doubloons cascading out of the nation's coffers. That is not the Sunak way. ""We have,"" he declared, ""been sowing the seeds of our recovery!"" He said another £1.25 billion of public money will be spent on innovative firms. Now he was on to stirring stuff about our national innovation agency and how we were going to bounce back, provided we continued to follow lockdown rules and avoided a second peak.Talk of a second peak was, perhaps, a good sign, for it could suggest we have passed the first peak. Not that they like to say that. For all Mr Sunak's virtuous vigour - he is the sort of bloke who has never eaten a whole packet of fig rolls in one sitting and then been consumed by guilt -the good news was still being sharply rationed.The Ministry of Defence's Professor Dame Angela McLean conceded that London hospitalisation rates had now dropped seven days in succession. That was all the statistical optimism we were permitted. One pipette per ocean-full of salted tears.The media were interested in PPE for health workers.Sky's Beth was back (first appearance for ages - did she pull an eyelash muscle with all that mascara?) She waxed on about terror among hospital staff who lacked protective gear. Mr Sunak twice said ""everybody has worked incredibly hard"".This has become a staple of modern politics. Over a billion pieces of PPE had now been delivered, more than 12 million pieces alone on Sunday. Beside him stood Mrs Doyle, the Irish science bod. Poor love, I wish they'd let her sit down. She looks so tired.Professor Peston of ITV treated us to one of his cameos, this time a mere 57 seconds. He peered down into his port hole like some enormous, shaggy cat. Behind him a member of his household was visible. She seemed to be searching for something. A full stop for Robert, perhaps.Then a young thruster from a new magazine for ""the European start-up ecosystem"" came on. He had a big advert for his publication beside him. He wanted to know about ""behavioural modelling"". Dame Angela said she had ""a whole sub-group of behavioural scientists called SpyB"" and they were analysing the public's morale.They should come to Herefordshire. Across the valley here, still lit by late sunshine as I write this, is a field where a neighbour keeps miniature donkeys. When not braying, the little creatures beat their heads and necks against their metal feeding troughs. That's it exactly. That's how the country is feeling. Further research by SpyB seems unnecessar y.",Newspaper
421,421,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 21, 2020 Tuesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
427,427,Striking the right balance over the lockdown;Letters to the Editor,"April 22, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),532,532,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Striking the right balance over the lockdownLetters to the Editor,"Sir, Responding to news that elderly people may have to suffer lockdown for more than a year, Lord Hope of Craighead (letter, Apr 21) urges ""a balance"" between the public interest and the right to a family life. This would mislead, if taken to imply the comparative weighing of two fixed quantities. Rather, we need to determine the very meaning of a legal right to family life in our extraordinary circumstances. That will involve a variety of factors: the good of family relationships, the public interests in containing the epidemic and letting the economy revive, and the duties that those interests generate.If the freedom to resume normal relations entailed risks to their own health only, the elderly could decide for themselves. However, as more than 90 per cent of those dying from Covid-19 are aged over 60, that freedom also entails risks to the capacity of the NHS and the lives of others. Therefore, the government has a duty to decide how much freedom it is socially safe to grant the elderly, and what restrictions they have a duty to suffer.Once the lockdown is relaxed, virus-related deaths will increase. As and when the NHS seems able to cope, the right of elderly people to risk seeing their loved ones face to face should expand.Nigel Biggar Regius professor of moral and pastoral theology, University of Oxford Sir, I was dismayed to read the quote by Paul Whiteman, of the National Association of Head Teachers, that ""a return to school is not a matter for debate - it is a question of science"" (""Schools stay shut as two in three pupils ignore online classes"", Apr 20). Even if the epidemiological debate about the virus were settled, which it is not, how we weight mortality risks (of predominantly older people) against child development and inequalities in learning is entirely a matter of debate. The judgment about whose welfare should be given priority in policy decisions is exactly that, a judgment, and cannot be settled by the evidence on virus transmission. Paul Dolan Professor of behavioural science, LSE Sir, In the debate as to whether the public should be wearing facemasks, the deaf community, who rely on lipreading and non-manual features in British Sign Language to communicate, has been overlooked. I am a deaf doctor, working on medical wards with acutely unwell patients, including those with coronavirus. I rely on lipreading to communicate.Only one manufacturer in the world, based in the US, produces surgical-grade transparent masks, and we are unable to obtain them in the UK. Despite involving organisations including the BMA and NHS England, we still do not have access to transparent masks.Dr Helen Grote Neurology registrar, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital Sir, Of course the public should not take precious NHS supplies of facemasks (""Facemasks for public 'risk NHS shortage' "", Apr 21). I have been wearing a simple, effective and washable mask when I go out since the lockdown. It is a ski neck warmer and can be doubled up for extra protection. It covers nose, mouth and chin and stays snug. I was pleased to see from your photograph in yesterday's edition that the Duke of Sussex had the same idea.Sheba Joseph Newcastle upon Tyne",Newspaper
429,429,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 22, 2020 Wednesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
432,432,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 23, 2020 Thursday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
440,440,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 24, 2020 Friday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
448,448,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 25, 2020 Saturday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
452,452,Balanced budgets are so old hat,"April 26, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),943,943,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Irwin Stelzer,Balanced budgets are so old hat,"Out with the new, in with the old is the political rule as two septuagenarians - old white guys in blue suits, as voters unhappy with the choice put it - face off for the presidency of the United States. Out with the old, in with the new is the economic policy rule.Start with fiscal policy. When Joseph reigned supreme in Egypt and John Maynard Keynes reigned supreme in policy circles, the strategy was to run deficits in lean years. What seemed sensible then, at least to economists who believed a lack of demand was the cause of recessions and depressions, is now thought excessively growth-restricting, at least to adherents of modern monetary theory, or MMT. After all, what are a central bank's printing presses for? Down with fusty old Milton Friedman, up with Stephanie Kelton, the Stony Brook University economist and adviser to Bernie Sanders who, if not the sole creator of MMT, is certainly its most evangelical enthusiast.Budget balancers are not only obsolete, but dangerous. Limiting fiscal policy to black ink in fear of inflation stifles growth. Recent experience with buckets of red ink proves that deficits do not produce inflation. Better to run large deficits, reaping the benefits of rapid growth, until inflation rears its unlovely head, and then raise taxes to nip that inflation in the proverbial bud.Worry not that this year's budget deficit is set to clock in at about $4 trillion, perhaps 20% of GDP, and the accumulated federal debt to top 100% of GDP. Economic policy is now driven by MMT, which is called ""ludicrous … fallacious at multiple levels … [and from] fringe economists"" by Larry Summers, former Treasury secretary to a liberal president and the intellectual darling of the centre-left.With the supply side of the economy likely to remain in intensive care for quite a while, the central bank's ability to produce paper money will exceed the economy's ability to produce stuff people want to buy with those dollars.With too much money chasing too few goods - Friedman's formulation - prices will start to rise and the politicians will be challenged to gird their loins and do as the MMTers assume they will: raise taxes. We will then know whether the theory will survive that clash with reality. Or whether, instead, politicians prefer inflation to tax rises, in which case interest rates will soar as lenders demand to be compensated for the risk of being repaid in depreciated dollars. Those interest payments will consume so large a portion of the government's budget as to be unsustainable.Along with MMT, the new policy alphabet soup includes UBI, or universal basic income. Traditionalist economists and policymakers believe the incentive to earn and spend drives people from the couch into the workplace, or into the lab in search of life-changing innovations. This is supplemented by what Adam Smith taught and, lately, behavioural economists teach: man is more than homo economicus. The regard of others, empathy with the poor, and religious belief all affect behaviour.But replacing the need to toil with a government that is somewhere between Lady Bountiful and the Tooth Fairy will reduce the incentives that make people work and capitalists' animal spirits soar. Capitalism will have to develop new incentives.UBI advocates dismiss any worries that it would be a disincentive to productive effort. Covid-19 has revealed that many Americans live on the edge of penury, among them workers we now realise are ""essential"" to the provision and delivery of the stuff on which we depend. Rather than fiddling with the programmes that in combination we call ""the welfare state"", give Americans money, conjured from thin air by the central bank rather than paid for with taxes (see MMT, above).Prisoners of old theories, among them a few Republican legislators, worry that when such payments exceed the wages offered by, say, Amazon and Walmart, seeking 175,000 and 150,000 new staff, respectively, the unemployed have an incentive to remain work-free. The newly enlightened UBI proponents believe that a guaranteed basic income would relieve poverty and uncertainty without increasing the number of citizens preferring a government cheque to working. It would free people to pursue more satisfying life choices, to ""prefer the good to the useful … and cultivate … the art of life itself and … not sell themselves for the means of life"", as Keynes put it some 90 years ago.Another policy that has moved from both the left and right fringes of American economics to centre stage is managed trade. China has never worried about such minor matters as the efficient use of the world's resources, preferring a trade policy aimed at creating a nation rich enough to challenge America's global leadership position. And, in the process, eviscerate America's industrial base and decimate many communities.Exit that old standby, free trade, and its cousin, globalisation. We are all Chinese now, although with less malevolent intent. Enter tariffs, higher subsidies to pharmaceutical companies searching for ways to cope with the coronavirus, government intervention to build redundancy into the healthcare system. And, by paying all medical costs of virus victims, whether or not insured, take a step closer to another novel idea, Bernie Sanders' Medicare for All.In sum, policies to balance budgets, maximise incentives to work and take risk, preserve free trade and rely on the existing healthcare system are so yesterday. MMT, UBI, managed trade and de facto healthcare for all are, well, so today.irwin@irwinstelzer.com Irwin Stelzer is a business adviserCovid-19 has revealed that many Americans live on the edge of penury",Newspaper
453,453,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 26, 2020 Sunday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1100,1100,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who is deputising for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
463,463,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 27, 2020 Monday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1099,1099,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
469,469,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 28, 2020 Tuesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1099,1099,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April comes hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
476,476,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 29, 2020 Wednesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1101,1101,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of            Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April came hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
480,480,Putting millions in quarantine till 2021 is discriminatory Sean O'Neill,"April 30, 2020 Thursday",International,The Times (London),436,436,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Sean O'Neill,Putting millions in quarantine till 2021 is discriminatory Sean O'Neill,"Some sort of new normal, involving facemasks, polite distancing and small family gatherings, is on the way - for most of the population. For another 10.2 million people, however, there is little prospect of any easing of the lockdown. These are the 8.7 million over-70s and the 1.5 million people who have been declared extremely clinically vulnerable.They are the shielders. The existing guidance from coronavirus headquarters in Whitehall states that they must stay indoors, avoid faceto-face contact and stay six feet away from members of their families. If they crave fresh air they should sit near an open window for a while.According to some of the thinking seemingly leaking from nudge unit gurus, the lockdown could be eased by a traffic light system, with the over-70s and the vulnerable remaining stuck on red well into 2021.Such a discriminatory policy is unsustainable. The blanket ""stay home"" policy was tolerable for a short while at the start of the emergency but it is time for some more refined thinking on the subject.Take the over-70s. I can think of two friends in that bracket who simply should not be lumped together in a one-size-fits-all policy. One is never more at home than in the pub with a pint of Guinness and his newspaper. The other cannot be contained indoors and is already breaching the guidelines by cycling at least 30 miles a day on quiet country roads.Personally, I am living with leukaemia and therefore classed as one of the extremely vulnerable. Yet a detailed analysis of the first 6,000 patients receiving critical care in hospital for Covid-19 recorded fewer than 1.5 per cent with blood cancers.This could be because leukaemia patients, already used to having compromised immune systems and being extremely cautious about infections, are taking the shielding advice very seriously. Or could it be that we are not as badly affected by coronavirus as first predicted? I am not saying we should throw caution to the wind. But, in the light of the torrent of medical data that has poured in since the outbreak began, some of the assumptions that underpinned the original shielding advice should be revisited. For example, issues about susceptibility to the virus have emerged around ethnicity, diabetes and weight. This is a new disease and medical researchers are learning new things every day about how it behaves, who is most at risk and how to treat it.Some of that learning must be taken into account to produce more nuanced advice, rather than another dictum confining more than ten million citizens to their homes for months without end.Sean O'Neill is chief reporter",Newspaper
483,483,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 30, 2020 Thursday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1101,1101,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of            Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April came hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
484,484,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","April 30, 2020 Thursday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1101,1101,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of            Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April came hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
487,487,"THE NEW W NORMAL;WHAT'LL OUR WORLD BE LIKE NOW? ; l'2-PINT LIMIT' IN BARS, SCREENED-OFF DINERS ; l MASKS AND DESK SHIELDS IN OFFICES ; lSMALLER CLASSES, 'BAN' ON RUSH HOUR","April 30, 2020 Thursday",International,The Sun (England),1141,1141,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,OLIVER HARVEY,"THE NEW W NORMALWHAT'LL OUR WORLD BE LIKE NOW? ; l'2-PINT LIMIT' IN BARS, SCREENED-OFF DINERS ; l MASKS AND DESK SHIELDS IN OFFICES ; lSMALLER CLASSES, 'BAN' ON RUSH HOUR","By OLIVER HARVEY AFTER lockdown ends, we will be confronted by a new reality.A world of face masks, with centuries of social behaviour and lifestyle habits set to change.Nicola Sturgeon recommended on Tuesday that the public wear face masks in enclosed spaces where social distancing is tough.Dominic Raab also warned not to expect an end to measures, but a ""moving to a new normal"".Cambridge University biologist Professor William Sutherland warned a second wave of Covid-19 if we resumed life as before.And UK chief medical officer Chris Whitty says the ""disruptive"" measures could last another year.Here, we take a look what our new world could be like.AFTER lockdown ends, we will be confronted by a new reality.A world of face masks, with centuries of social behaviour and lifestyle habits set to change.Nicola Sturgeon recommended on Tuesday that the public wear face masks in enclosed spaces where social distancing is tough.Dominic Raab also warned not to expect an end to measures, but a ""moving to a new normal"".Cambridge University biologist Professor William Sutherland warned a second wave of Covid-19 if we resumed life as before.And UK chief medical officer Chris Whitty says the ""disruptive"" measures could last another year.Here, we take a look what our new world could be like.FOOTBALL, rugby, cricket and horse racing representatives are meeting government medical experts this week to discuss plans to resume action.But sport - if it gets the go-ahead - is likely to be behind closed doors.There, footballers would avoid the pre-match handshake and there could be bans on spitting and players celebrating a goal too close to each other.World Health Organisation adviser Dr Brian McCloskey, public health director for London 2012 Olympics, said: ""The bigger the match, the bigger the competition, the more complicated those mitigating actions will have to be, and therefore the less likely it is that they can be done safely.""A local event - community football, community running - is much easier to see how that happens. Bigger events will be a challenge this summer.""National clinical director Professor Jason Leitch suggested games like golf and tennis may return first - not football.He said: ""Some sports, which are clearly physically distanced and are maybe outdoors, will be able to do that.""Others will be more challenging. I can't imagine snooker will be back first but you imagine something like tennis or golf might be back sooner.""The number of people that have to go to football games, even to run them behind closed doors, is significant.""SHOPS will reopen with socially-distanced queues, plastic screens at the tills and hand sanitiser stations.Fashion giant Next yesterday said that once restrictions end, it will focus on reopening its shops in retail parks, with more space for customers to queue outside, and longer opening hours to stagger shopping time.DIY chains are reopening with new safety measures. Wickes is limiting the number of shoppers let into stores and has installed sanitising stations.Homebase said it has ""strict controls"" including Perspex guards at tills and social distancing floor markings. Both chains will take card-only payments.Yesterday Aldi said it would offer face masks to all its store workers.The British Retail Consortium advises closure of changing rooms and the regular cleaning of door handles and keypads.PASSENGERS may soon have to wear face masks on buses, trains and subways.The call by civic leaders including London Mayor Sadiq Khan follows Germany, France and New York making it a rule on transport, with passengers at Bearsden, near Glasgow, right, showing an example.In London passengers board buses by the middle doors to protect www.drivers.UK Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said businesses should be asking: ""Why does everybody have to travel in rush hour?"" It signals more flexible hours and shift patterns.Mr Shapps told transport chiefs hand sanitiser and distancing rules could be introduced on buses, trams and trains as lockdown lifts.Airport testing and thermal screening is mooted. A Cambridge Uni report says pump attendants could be reintroduced to take drivers' contactless payments.WHEN our schools return, classes may be smaller, with year groups taking turns to study at school or at home.Also, some could work in the mornings, others in the afternoons, with breaks taken at different times.Norway might be a guide to what could happen here. There, parents pick up and drop off kids at staggered times, and aren't allowed into the school. Schools have more handwashing facilities, and surfaces and toys are cleaned twice daily. And white lines, smiley faces and other markings indicate two-metre gaps to ensure social distancing.When UK schools reopen, Government adviser Professor Susan Michie warns they ""must do better"" at promoting good hygiene.She said: ""There would need to be hand washing stations and a whole new routine set up where children wash their hands before they join the lunch queue.""FACE masks, plastic gloves and temperature checks are likely to become common in the workplace. Eventually there could even be viral blood tests for employees.Commercial estate agency Cushman & Wakefield leases offices across the UK and has advised many Chinese firms returning to work. It recommends transparent shields between desks and suggests workers are only allowed to walk clockwise in lanes around the office following a route marked by arrows.Each morning, staff take a new paper place mat for their desks, which are six feet apart, and then discard them at the end of the day.Construction firm workers who have to work within two metres of each other are now told to work side by side, or facing away from each other.If this is not possible, work should be limited to 15 minutes or less.TO allow pubs to reopen, drinkers could be rationed to two or three pints, then politely asked to go home, Government adviser and economist Eyal Winter has suggested.Another Government adviser, Professor Robert Dingwall, said: ""If it is a sunny weekend afternoon and the pub has a garden and the landlords are prepared to accept responsibility for not overcrowding the garden, I see no reason why it shouldn't reopen.""Diners are likely to face supermarket-style queues outside restaurants, and for toilets once inside. Those with coughs maybe declined entry. Waiters may have to wear masks and gloves, and door handles and surfaces touched by diners cleaned regularly.Tables would be well spaced and might even have screens between them. Food and wine might be delivered to an adjacent table, so customers can serve themselves. In Hong Kong restaurants have reopened, with diners pre-ordering and paying, with no menus or card machines.Trade body UKHospitality fears that even if venues open with fewer tables, they would still struggle financially.",Newspaper
493,493,Digital bank is scrapped after only five months,"May 2, 2020 Saturday",International,The Times (London),322,322,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Katherine Griffiths,Digital bank is scrapped after only five months,"Royal Bank of Scotland is scrapping Bó, its digital bank, to focus on lending to customers struggling to cope with the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and consequent lockdown of the economy.Bó's prospects had appeared to be gloomy in January when RBS announced the departure of Mark Bailie, who had set up the digital lender. Mr Bailie had been a contender for the chief executive role at RBS before losing out to Alison Rose in November. RBS spent tens of millions of pounds creating the new lender, which it believed was a more cost-effective approach than buying an independent financial technology company. It issued a bright yellow card that it believed would attract younger customers.The business was launched in November and used social influencers in its advertising campaign. It ran into immediate problems after critics said that its functionality was inferior to that of established rivals such as Monzo and Revolut.Bó's technology will be wrapped into Mettle, a digital bank for small business customers that had been developed by Ms Rose when she led the commercial banking department.Ms Rose said that Bó, which has 11,000 customers, had not failed. ""We have made a prudent decision to merge the technology platforms of Bó and Mettle,"" she said. ""As I have always said, we will apply a disciplined view in terms of our approach to innovations - testing and learning."" She added that the bank's priorities were elsewhere. ""Clearly in the current situation we've had to make prioritisation choices about where we will invest.""Bó was created to help people who were not on top of their finances, irrespective of their salary, by offering ways to set budgets and save money.According to its research 40 per cent of working-age adults in Britain - about 17 million people - have less than £100 in savings. It used techniques developed by the government-backed Behavioural Insights Team to nudge customers into better habits.",Newspaper
494,494,Digital bank is scrapped after only five months,"May 2, 2020 Saturday",International,The Times (London),322,322,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Katherine Griffiths,Digital bank is scrapped after only five months,"Royal Bank of Scotland is scrapping Bó, its digital bank, to focus on lending to customers struggling to cope with the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and consequent lockdown of the economy.Bó's prospects had appeared to be gloomy in January when RBS announced the departure of Mark Bailie, who had set up the digital lender. Mr Bailie had been a contender for the chief executive role at RBS before losing out to Alison Rose in November. RBS spent tens of millions of pounds creating the new lender, which it believed was a more cost-effective approach than buying an independent financial technology company. It issued a bright yellow card that it believed would attract younger customers.The business was launched in November and used social influencers in its advertising campaign. It ran into immediate problems after critics said that its functionality was inferior to that of established rivals such as Monzo and Revolut.Bó's technology will be wrapped into Mettle, a digital bank for small business customers that had been developed by Ms Rose when she led the commercial banking department.Ms Rose said that Bó, which has 11,000 customers, had not failed. ""We have made a prudent decision to merge the technology platforms of Bó and Mettle,"" she said. ""As I have always said, we will apply a disciplined view in terms of our approach to innovations - testing and learning."" She added that the bank's priorities were elsewhere. ""Clearly in the current situation we've had to make prioritisation choices about where we will invest.""Bó was created to help people who were not on top of their finances, irrespective of their salary, by offering ways to set budgets and save money.According to its research 40 per cent of working-age adults in Britain - about 17 million people - have less than £100 in savings. It used techniques developed by the government-backed Behavioural Insights Team to nudge customers into better habits.",Newspaper
497,497,"Don't patronise the over-70s, Boris. There's life in us yet","May 2, 2020 Saturday",International,The Independent (United Kingdom),1215,1215,England & Wales,JANET STREET-PORTER,"Don't patronise the over-70s, Boris. There's life in us yet","According to Dame Joan Bakewell, the government must stop treating the elderly ""like a crazy old people's club"". Boris Johnson promises plans for easing lockdown will be announced next week, but there's no light at the end of his Alpine tunnel for my generation.Some doctors and scientists are calling for the over-70s to isolate for months to come until a Covid-19 vaccine is available - possibly the end of this year or even 2021. Meanwhile, any healthy pensioner who dares to express the desire to go back to work or leave home and meet much-missed family members is shouted down by a mob on social media, demonised for ""placing the NHS at risk"".But is this true? Among those who have suffered the most during this pandemic are the overweight, smokers, people with lung conditions and existing medical conditions. Yes, those over 70 are more likely to be vulnerable, but not all - look at legendary Colonel Tom Moore (100) and Jeremy Corbyn (70) who attended prime minister's questions this week rather than sitting at home.We are witnessing the horrible rise of age discrimination, brought about by fear and misinformation. Don't make healthy baby boomers (and older people) pay the price for our government's mismanagement of this crisis. It is ministers who approved entering lockdown two weeks too late, are failing to organise testing quickly enough and continuing to allow planes to bring thousands of visitors to the UK every day without checking their symptoms.I beg the prime minister to offer a phased return to normality which is fair for everyone, not just the young - and cut the waffle about meadows and mountains. Joan Bakewell is a Labour peer, a former government advocate for older people, and at 87, she's still a prolific writer and broadcaster. Listen to her frustration on Christopher Hope's Chopper's Politics podcast on Friday claiming that politicians stupidly assume everyone over 70 has the same mental and physical characteristics and leads the same kind of lives, whereas there's just as many differences for the generations aged between 30 and 60.If you're 70, you could be like Colonel Tom and expect another thirty years of active life. In your thirties and middle age there will be obese people, fit people, active people and loafers. There will be workers and those who stay at home. So why do politicians continually patronise pensioners?This cabinet is the youngest since 1945, with an average age of 47.8 - at 55, Boris is the third eldest member - and our chancellor is just 39. Boris might have a fiancee over two decades his junior and a new baby to keep him in touch with ""youth"", but does he really understand how people over 70 feel?The signs are not good. To end lockdown in a phased manner he must bring together people of every generation, involve behavioural scientists and psychologists as well as medics and scientists. Older people have a wealth of life experience, are capable of making informed decisions about what risks to take with their health, but now they're being treated like children.When Dame Joan said on The One Show this week that (after 50 days of solitude) she invited a friend to tea in her garden (and they stood the proscribed distance apart), there was outrage from some viewers. There is little risk to standing two metres apart in a supermarket queue, so what's wrong with a cup of tea in a garden?Now, ITV boss Kevin Lygo has said that older actors cannot return to work in soaps like Coronation Street - because he fears for the health of Ken Barlow. I have been told by ITV that I cannot go back to work into the studio for the same reason, which is ridiculous when I see overweight smokers a couple of generations younger given the go-ahead. Is it because of misguided insurance advice?Once again, older people are being linked to the P-word - problem. Wouldn't it be handy for everyone if we spent the rest of our lives digging our gardens, talking to the dog and pottering about dusting, instead of demanding we can return to work and denying young people a slot in the workplace - the same younger people who are pretending lockdown doesn't apply to them.The reason why care homes are suffering so terribly is because this government didn't make them a priority quickly enough and allowed residents to be discharged from hospitals without being tested. Age discrimination at worse, thoughtlessness at the very least.One way back to normality is to introduce medical passports for all age groups, which would be mandatory for anyone over 70. These passports could require weekly testing, a healthy weight, no smoking, and a lack of existing medical conditions which might make the bearer vulnerable. If I pass all these tests, then why can't I go back to work as the lockdown eases?The current policy of issuing endless death statistics and infection rates has produced widespread fear. Scientists are cautious and do not radiate optimism. The prime minister tries to exude positivity, but doesn't offer detail. The net result of the government's approach has been a surge in anxiety and negativity. A new poll shows that - even if lockdown ended - 60 per cent of the public now fear going to bars and restaurants, using public transport, or attending sporting events. More worrying, 40 per cent are scared of going to the shops and sending their children back to school. A third are worried about going out at all.According to one expert, people need to ask themselves ""before the virus, was I worried about dying this year?"" If the answer is no, then they should not be so worried about contracting it. The government's big message - stay at home an stay safe - might have been successful but it has engendered disproportionate anxiety. That consequence is going to require careful risk management if the economy is ever going to restart.Older people have decades of managing risk and evaluating life choices, so don't deny us the right to remain useful and productive members of society. And don't keep us from our friends and families any longer, Mr Johnson.Pets as presenters... are you fur real?The lockdown means that broadcasters face running out of material unless they are resourceful. ITV's Love Island has been cancelled, and drama bosses are talking of placing entire cast and crew on some productions in quarantine so they can interact with each other and continue to shoot. I'm not sure I could cope with two weeks cooped up with my Loose Women co-presenters, much though I enjoy their company.Channel 4 has a novel solution - replacing human presenters with pets! They've announced Snoop Dogs, a version of Through the Keyhole but with a new twist. Dogs fitted with small cameras are allowed to roam through a celebrity's home while the audience has to guess the owner's identity.I can foresee problems - if my Border Terrier, Badger, is typical, all the footage will be shot under the sofa, and in the few inches behind the dustbin. His favourite activity is monitoring the dishwasher if we forget to close the door - anything edible is licked up in seconds.Sadly, Badger has an inexplicable fear of the fridge door - the minute it opens he hides under the stairs whimpering. Mind you, Badger has other talents - he sings beautifully - so perhaps Britain's Got Talent are looking for new acts?",Newspaper
500,500,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","May 2, 2020 Saturday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1101,1101,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of            Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April came hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
502,502,"Set free healthy over-seventies, say doctors;Wholesale lockdown of old is 'discriminatory'Doctors back calls to free over-70s","May 3, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),1295,1295,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Caroline Wheeler;Nicholas Hellen ;Tim Shipman,"Set free healthy over-seventies, say doctorsWholesale lockdown of old is 'discriminatory'Doctors back calls to free over-70s","Correction: Our report ""Set free healthy over-seventies, say doctors"" (News, last week) referred to 1.8 million people classified as ""clinically vulnerable"" to Covid-19. In fact this group is officially categorised as ""clinically extremely vulnerable"". We apologise for the error.Lockdown should be eased for the healthy over-70s because keeping them inside is damaging their mental health, senior doctors warned Boris Johnson last night.The British Medical Association (BMA) and the Royal College of GPs intervened to say that age alone should not determine people's ability to go about their daily lives when the government begins easing the lockdown restrictions. About 1.8 million ""clinically vulnerable people"" have been warned that they must stay in lockdown for at least 12 weeks, with some ministers saying they might need to remain at home until there is a vaccine, which could take a year or more.They include people ""aged 70 or older regardless of medical conditions"" and those ""under 70 with an underlying health condition"".But in a statement, the BMA said: ""A blanket ban on any section of the population being prohibited from lockdown easing would be discriminatory and unacceptable.""The doctor's union said the government should ensure that ""those at highest risk from infection are protected"", but added: ""This needs to be based on individual risk that would apply at all ages rather than an arbitrary age of 60 or 70.""Last night, Johnson's father, Stanley, urged him to end restrictions in time for his 80th birthday in August when he hopes to climb Mount Kilimanjaro to raise money for the Save the Asian Elephant charity. ""I am rather hoping they will ease the restrictions in time,"" he said.As the death toll rose yesterday to 28,131 - a rise of 621 - the prime minister summoned ministers and aides to Downing Street to thrash out a ""whack-a-mole"" exit strategy, which he is due to publish on Thursday. Under the plans, he will unveil a slow easing of the lockdown but warn that where virus ""hotspots"" erupt, a tougher localised lockdown could be imposed. Officials will only tweak the lockdown this week, encouraging building sites to reopen, relaxing rules on outdoor activities, urging people to cover their faces on public transport and key workers to put their children back in school.Businesses will be given three weeks to prepare work spaces so people can remain socially distanced. Johnson will then lay out proposals to make bigger changes at the end of May. They will see pupils who have key tests or exams next year (Sats, GCSEs and A-levels), return to school, and more retailers, such as garden centres, reopen. Office workers will be told to stagger the working day, keep canteens closed and have a red and blue teams working different days.However, a YouGov poll for The Sunday Times shows that just one in four adults would feel safe at work and, by 47% to 28%, people oppose the reopening of schools in the next few weeks.A senior government source Continued on page 2 ?HOTSPOTS SET FOR A WHACKING PAGE 9 ? Continued from page 2 said: ""The plan is to get the maximum economic return without raising infection rates. We will lift together but if you suddenly get a particular nightmare in one area you intervene to lock down harder.""Doctors, academics, politicians, charities and celebrities called on the government not to treat the over-70s differently from the rest of the population.Martin Marshall, chairman of the Royal College of GPs, warned that prolonged lockdown would ""impact"" the ""physical and mental health"" of the over-70s and that age alone was not the best way to decide ""who should self-isolate and to what extent during the next stage of lockdown"".He said: ""GPs are finding that many patients who are currently 'shielding' are expressing concern about their ability to continue extreme isolation for a long period, and this needs to be taken into account as plans for how the lockdown will continue are formulated.""Baroness Ros Altmann, former pensions minister and business champion for older workers, is leading the rebellion within the Conservative Party. She said: ""A lot of people have been emailing MPs and ministers and the prime minister expressing outrage. There may be a battle raging in the heart of government on how to deal with this dreadfully difficult issue there are some, I fear, pushing for an agebased lockdown."" Eileen Burns, past president of the British Geriatrics Society, said that while there was a case for frail older people to be shielded for longer, those who were free of any underlying health conditions might not be prepared to sacrifice ""one of the precious years they have left on the off-chance that might mean they don't pick up the virus"".Sir Muir Gray, consultant in public health for the NHS and professor of primary healthcare at Oxford University, warned that a prolonged lockdown could create medical problems for the elderly, through ""deconditioning syndrome"".He said: ""If there's a reduction in activity - physical, cognitive and emotional - that will adversely impact people starting now, but also continuing after lockdown and increasing the risk of dementia and frailty.""Lord Gus O'Donnell, former cabinet secretary and behavioural economist, said: ""I see no reason to lock down over-70s for longer on the grounds of stopping them passing the virus on to others.""If we were imposing rules based entirely on personal risk then we would be tougher on men, ethnic minorities, non-smokers, and those with relevant other health problems.""Sir Ranulph Fiennes, 76, the explorer, also adds his voice to the chorus of disapproval among the over-70s. ""If they do arbitrarily say that over-70s will forcibly be treated differently to others rather than advised of this, I would certainly risk being shoved in a prison lockdown rather than a home lockdown,"" he said. ""This thing, which we're talking about now, is very, very un-British.""Caroline Abrahams, charity director of Age UK, warned that isolation was already taking its toll on the elderly: ""We are hearing some heart-tending stories from people who are desperately alone and already at the end of their tether as a result of the lockdown.""However, the economist and behavioural scientist Andrew Oswald warned that older people had no idea of the danger they are in.Oswald, a professor at the University of Warwick, said: ""Well over 1,000 people have died in this country with no underlying health conditions.""According to a paper he co-wrote, if the government pursues a general exit strategy, fatalities among 70-year-olds would be 75 times higher than for 20-year-olds; for 60 year-olds they would be 50 times as great and for 50 year-olds they would be 20 times higher.The YouGov poll found that 57% think that the over-70s and vulnerable people should continue to self-isolate once the lockdown is over.At a Downing Street press conference, Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, said ministers would step up efforts to help the elderly and vulnerable trapped at home, but did not say they would soon be let out.He said: ""It's very difficult for people who we have asked to stay at home. We want to offer them the hope that we can return to normality. We are going to do everything we can to support them.""In other developments: l Ministers announced a £76m fund to help victims of domestic violence, which has risen as a result of lockdown l Jenrick said the government was considering requests for help from struggling airlines l Government scientists are investigating whether Britain's high death toll is the result of the obesity crisis after it emerged that the proportion of severely obese patients in intensive care with CV-19 is twice the proportion of severely obese people in the general population.",Newspaper
503,503,"Set free healthy over-seventies, say doctors;Wholesale lockdown of old is 'discriminatory'Doctors back calls to free over-70s","May 3, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),1287,1287,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Caroline Wheeler; Nicholas Hellen; Tim Shipman,"Set free healthy over-seventies, say doctorsWholesale lockdown of old is 'discriminatory'Doctors back calls to free over-70s","Correction: Our report ""Set free healthy over-seventies, say doctors"" (News, last week) referred to 1.8 million people classified as ""clinically vulnerable"" to Covid-19. In fact this group is officially categorised as ""clinically extremely vulnerable"". We apologise for the error.Lockdown should be eased for the healthy over-70s because keeping them inside is damaging their mental health, senior doctors warned Boris Johnson last night.The British Medical Association (BMA) and the Royal College of GPs intervened to say that age alone should not determine people's ability to go about their daily lives when the government begins easing the lockdown restrictions. About 1.8 million ""clinically vulnerable people"" have been warned that they must stay in lockdown for at least 12 weeks, with some ministers saying they might need to remain at home until there is a vaccine, which could take a year or more.They include people ""aged 70 or older regardless of medical conditions"" and those ""under 70 with an underlying health condition"".But in a statement, the BMA said: ""A blanket ban on any section of the population being prohibited from lockdown easing would be discriminatory and unacceptable.""The doctors' union said the government should ensure that ""those at highest risk from infection are protected"", but added: ""This needs to be based on individual risk that would apply at all ages rather than an arbitrary age of 60 or 70.""Last night, Johnson's father, Stanley, urged him to end restrictions in time for his 80th birthday in August when he hopes to climb Mount Kilimanjaro to raise money for the Save the Asian Elephant charity. ""I am rather hoping they will ease the restrictions in time,"" he said.As the death toll rose yesterday to 28,131 - a rise of 621 - the prime minister summoned ministers and aides to Downing Street to thrash out a ""whack-a-mole"" exit strategy, which he is due to publish on Thursday. Under the plans, he will unveil a slow easing of the lockdown but warn that where virus ""hotspots"" erupt, a tougher localised lockdown could be imposed. Officials will only tweak the lockdown this week, encouraging building sites to reopen, relaxing rules on outdoor activities, urging people to cover their faces on public transport and key workers to put their children back in school.Businesses will be given three weeks to prepare work spaces so people can remain socially distanced. Johnson will then lay out proposals to make bigger changes at the end of May. They will see pupils who have key tests or exams next year (Sats, GCSEs and A-levels), return to school, and more retailers, such as garden centres, reopen. Office workers will be told to stagger the working day, keep canteens closed and have a red and blue teams working different days.However, a YouGov poll for The Sunday Times shows that just one in four adults would feel safe at work and, by 47% to 28%, people oppose the reopening of schools in the next few weeks.A senior government source Continued on page 2 ?HOTSPOTS SET FOR A WHACKING PAGE 9 ? Continued from page 1 said: ""The plan is to get the maximum economic return without raising infection rates. We will lift together but if you suddenly get a particular nightmare in one area you intervene to lock down harder.""Doctors, academics, politicians, charities and celebrities called on the government not to treat the over-70s differently from the rest of the population.Martin Marshall, chairman of the Royal College of GPs, warned that prolonged lockdown would ""impact"" the ""physical and mental health"" of the over-70s and that age alone was not the best way to decide ""who should self-isolate and to what extent during the next stage of lockdown"".He said: ""GPs are finding that many patients who are currently 'shielding' are expressing concern about their ability to continue extreme isolation for a long period, and this needs to be taken into account as plans for how the lockdown will continue are formulated.""Baroness Altmann, former pensions minister and business champion for older workers, is a leading rebel within the Conservative Party. She said: ""A lot of people have been emailing MPs and ministers and the prime minister expressing outrage. There may be a battle raging in the heart of government on how to deal with this dreadfully difficult issue there are some, I fear, pushing for an age-based lockdown.""Eileen Burns, past president of the British Geriatrics Society, said that while there was a case for frail older people to be shielded for longer, those who were free of health problems might not be prepared to sacrifice ""one of the precious years they have left on the offchance that might mean they don't pick up the virus"".Sir Muir Gray, consultant in public health for the NHS and professor of primary healthcare at Oxford University, warned that a prolonged lockdown could create medical problems for the elderly, through ""deconditioning syndrome"".He said: ""If there's a reduction in activity - physical, cognitive and emotional - that will adversely impact people starting now, but also continuing after lockdown and increasing the risk of dementia and frailty.""Lord O'Donnell, former cabinet secretary and behavioural economist, said: ""I see no reason to lock down over-70s for longer on the grounds of stopping them passing the virus on to others.""If we were imposing rules based entirely on personal risk then we would be tougher on men, ethnic minorities, non-smokers, and those with relevant other health problems.""Sir Ranulph Fiennes, 76, the explorer, also adds his voice to the chorus of disapproval. ""If they do arbitrarily say that over-70s will forcibly be treated differently to others rather than advised of this, I would certainly risk being shoved in a prison lockdown rather than a home lockdown,"" he said. ""This thing, which we're talking about now, is very, very un-British.""Caroline Abrahams, charity director of Age UK, warned that isolation was taking its toll on the elderly: ""We are hearing some heartrending stories from people who are desperately alone and already at the end of their tether as a result of the lockdown.""However, the economist and behavioural scientist Andrew Oswald warned that older people had no idea of the danger they are in.Oswald, a professor at the University of Warwick, said: ""Well over 1,000 people have died in this country with no underlying health conditions.""According to a paper he co-wrote, if the government pursues a general exit strategy, fatalities among 70-year-olds would be 75 times higher than for 20-year-olds; for 60 year-olds they would be 50 times as great and for 50 year-olds they would be 20 times higher.The YouGov poll found that 57% think that the over-70s and vulnerable people should continue to self-isolate once the lockdown is over.Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, said ministers would step up efforts to help the elderly and vulnerable trapped at home, but did not say they would soon be let out. He said: ""It's very difficult for people who we have asked to stay at home. We want to offer them the hope that we can return to normality. We are going to do everything we can to support them.""In other developments: l Ministers announced a £76m fund to help victims of domestic violence, which has risen as a result of lockdown l Jenrick said the government was considering requests for help from struggling airlines l Government scientists are investigating whether Britain's high death toll is the result of the obesity crisis after it emerged that the proportion of severely obese patients in intensive care with Covid-19 is twice the proportion of severely obese people in the population.The over-70s must mobilise, Lord Blunkett, Letters, page 20",Newspaper
510,510,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","May 3, 2020 Sunday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1101,1101,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of            Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April came hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
521,521,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","May 4, 2020 Monday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1101,1101,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of            Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April came hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
544,544,"How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?;Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","May 5, 2020 Tuesday",International,telegraph.co.uk,1101,1101,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,"By Sarah Knapton, Science Editor","How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last?Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown for a further three weeks and said restrictions will not be lifted until changes can be ""safely"" made","The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has extended UK lockdown measures for a further three weeks to prevent the spread of            Covid-19. The announcement on Thursday 16 April came hours after Mr Raab chaired a Cobra meeting to discuss the current social restrictions in place.The extension has been put in place for ""at least"" three weeks which will take the UK to May 7, when we can expect a second review.Mr Raab, who deputised for Boris Johnson, said the Government was being ""as open as we responsibly can at this stage"". ""It would not be responsible to prejudge the evidence that Sage will have and review in just a few weeks' time.""The Foreign Secretary said the Government carefully followed what is happening in other countries but ""we've got to do what is right for the British people based on the advice of our experts, grounded in the conditions prevailing here in the UK"".He said that measures put in place had been successful but that SAGE said that some settings were still seeing infections spreading.He warned that relaxing social restrictions now would damage economy in the longterm.•: How other countries are ending lockdown                     Is lockdown working?                     Less than 12 hours after the Prime Minister's historic address to the nation on March 23, the London Underground was jammed with commuters (see video below), while builders were seen eating together in communal canteens, making a mockery of the Government's rule that no more than two people can gather together in public.Professor Susan Michie, Director of the University College London's Centre for Behaviour Change, warned that some people would simply not be able to carry out the measures, even if they wanted to.""Five million self-employed people are being left potentially destitute by the Government failing to offer financial supportas they have done for directly employed workers,"" she said. ""Since [statutory sick pay of] £94 is not enough to pay rent, bills, food for a family etc, they will be forced to carry on as usual.""The British Transport Police is now on hand to make sure only            critical workers are using the London Underground. But such an inauspicious start to the lockdown suggests the virus will spread further than it would have, had stricter measures been implemented earlier,            as they have in other countries. And it means that the measures we do have are likely to be in place for longer to ""flatten the curve"" in a way that would prevent a second dangerous peak.In addition, on April 1 the Government revealed figures that suggested the lockdown was starting to fray as data showed an ""uptick""            in the number of people using transport.The number of those using their cars and public transport, which had been consistently dropping since strict social distancing measures were introduced, rose for the first time.It is feared that sunny weather will prompt more people to break the rules and go outside to socialise as boredom kicks in.•: Can I go for a drive during lockdown?How long will lockdown last?Mr Raab said the Government needed to be satisfied of five things before it would consider it safe to adjust any of the current measures:•Protect the NHS's ability to cope and be confident that the NHS is able to provide sufficient critical care across the UK.•See a sustained and consistent fall in daily death rates to be confident the UK is beyond the peak.•Reliable data from Sage showing rate of infection is decreasing to manageable levels across the board.•Confident that testing capacity and PPE are in hand with supply able to meet future demand.•Confident that any adjustments to the current measures would not risk a second peak in infections which would overwhelm the NHS.When the lockdown was first announced, Professor Mark Woolhouse, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said: ""We now enter a phase of careful monitoring. We are looking for indicators first that the epidemic is slowing down and then for numbers of new cases to start to fall. ""After three weeks we will have to decide whether the restrictions need to be continued, can be relaxed, or can be relaxed temporarily with the expectation of imposing them again later. ""We must also monitor the damage that the lockdown is doing; damage to the economy, to education, to psychological well-being and to health and social care provision in the community. The impacts of this epidemic are too far reaching for policy decisions to be driven by epidemiology alone.""Professor Sheila Bird said that more cases in coming weeks would make it easier for the Government to predict how the epidemic is responding to lockdown measures, which will inform how long they remain in place. ""Once an epidemic takes hold, as now in UK, the country's own data - properly reported and interpreted - take precedence over modelling as the data tell us the actual toll which the epidemic is exacting,"" she said.""A huge amount can be inferred about the immediately forthcoming weeks from these data directly, including whether further policy changes are needed to reinforce social-distancing; for example in particular age groups.""Some experts are still concerned that the current restrictions do not go far enough while others say the government has been hit by an ""epidemic of action"", and is now bringing in measures that have little rationale. Professor Robert Dingwall, Professor of Sociology, at Nottingham Trent University, wrote in The Telegraph: ""It is another triumph of populism over science, of a capitulation to the demand to 'do something'. ""We are still seeing some notion that 'the people' are selfish and must be bullied and disciplined. ""The people are not selfish; they have behaved in ways that are individually rational but have collectively irrational results.""However Dr Andrea Collins, Senior Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), said: ""I believe that they have not quite gone far enough. The 'absolutely' necessary to go to work is still being used by some when it is not required-I think we need permits across controlled areas to go to a workplace.""Recent modelling from the universities of Exeter, Bristol and Warwick suggested that without any measures at all, the epidemic would have peaked around 133 days after first person-to-person transmission in Britain, which happened around February 28. So the lockdown has the potential of curtailing the spread by around seven weeks. A welcome relief for people who could have been facing lockdown for most of the summer.",Newspaper; Web Publication
550,550,"Traffic lights, hand-shaking and complacency: the advice","May 6, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),1045,1045,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Rhys Blakely,"Traffic lights, hand-shaking and complacency: the advice","After calls for greater transparency the government published more of the guidance from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) that has informed its response to the pandemic : grading activities by risk By April 1, two months after Britain's first confirmed cases of Covid-19, the experts could see evidence that the outbreak was waning. ""We are aware that modelling colleagues estimate that the changes already in place have probably reduced R to below 1,"" a subcommittee of behavioural scientists known as SPI-B, which feeds into Sage, said. That would mean that each infected person was resulting in less than one new case.The SPI-B panel still advocated rigorous restrictions, however. Measures should be considered to stop vulnerable people being employed in ""high-risk environments"", it said. A sudden resurgence of the virus would be seen as ""a serious failure of policy and trust in public health advice will be lost"".The panel backed a cautious and incremental exit from lockdown, possibly involving ""rapid pilot trials"" of looser restrictions in less-affected areas. The ""simple rules"" of lockdown would have to be replaced by more complicated messaging, it said. Day-to-day activities could be graded according to risk, following the ""traffic light"" system used to promote healthy foods. It suggested a public education campaign in which activities were graded as ""high-risk (avoid), medium (do rarely and carefully) and low (do freely)"".johnson shakes off advice On March 3 SPI-B had cautioned against close physical contact. ""Government should advise against greetings such as shaking hands and hugging, given existing evidence about the importance of hand hygiene,"" the panel said. On the same day Boris Johnson told a No 10 press conference that he was still shaking hands. ""People obviously can make up their own minds but I think the scientific evidence is, our judgment is, that washing your hands is the crucial thing,"" he said. He shook hands on a visit to Kettering General Hospital, Northamptonshire, on February 28, above.fears of public complacency On March 12 Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, spoke to Sky News about the potential advantages of people becoming infected and immune. By March 23 - when lockdown was imposed - he was wrestling with how to impress on the public just how dangerous Covid-19 had proven to be. ""A substantial number of people still do not feel sufficiently personally threatened,"" SPI-B said. ""The perceived level of personal threat needs to be increased among those who are complacent, using hard-hitting emotional messaging."" Earlier government messaging had been a mistake. ""There seems to be insufficient understanding of, or feelings of responsibility about, people's role in transmitting the infection to others. This may have resulted in part from messaging around the low level of risk to most people and talk of the desirability of building 'herd immunity.'"" There was criticism of advice given to vulnerable people to self-isolate. ""The guidance is vague,"" the scientists said.""The phrase 'aim to' is too weak - the guidance should promote action not aims."" People had been told to wipe down surfaces but official advice had not told them to use disinfectant.dark forecasts for the nhs On March 20 the SPI-M-O committee, which includes specialists on flu epidemics, said: ""It is very likely we will see ICU capacity in London breached by the end of the month, even if additional measures are put in place today."" The rest of the country was one to two weeks behind. ""In the absence of additional measures being put into place in the next few days, it is likely that we will breach ICU capacity in other regions.""This was in a report to Sage, not to ministers. Earlier in March the scientists estimated that 12 per cent of people ill enough to be admitted to hospital with Covid-19 would die. The latest data shows a proportion of 33 per cent.doubts on immunity passports On April 13 SPI-B voiced concerns over the idea, floated by Matt Hancock, the health secretary, on April 1, that ""immunity passports"" could be used to allow some people to leave lockdown. Tests would have to be 98 per cent accurate to be approved by the regulator. Even then, large numbers of people would be given inaccurate results. The panel also warned that the system could lead to a black market in fake test results. ""If a test result is a requirement for a resumption of work, strategies to 'game' the system may arise,"" it said. ""These include people deliberately seeking out infection or attempting to purchase a fake test result, commercial organisations selling unapproved tests, or approved tests becoming available through private organisations at prices that make them unavailable to most.""It also warned that ""some employers may discriminate on the basis of antibody status"".the schools dilemma On March 2 the scientific advisers said that the epidemic seen in Wuhan was ""inconsistent with no transmission from/to children"". Specialists on respiratory diseases advised that ""school closures are likely to impact transmission [of Covid], although significantly less than with flu"".On March 4, however, SPI-B voiced concern over a potential public backlash. ""School closures will be highly disruptive and likely to present an unequal burden to different sections of society,"" the panel said. It pointed to Japan, where it said the policy was giving rise to growing discontent. On March 14, the closure of schools and ""social distancing of over-65s"" were listed as only two measures with ""high confidence"" of limiting transmission of Covid-19. Three days later SPI-B said that it had ""not found a robust academic evidence base relating to the acceptability or social impact of dismissal v closure"".By March 17 and 18 Sage was grappling with locking down the capital. Concerns had been raised that restrictions there would cause people to flee, seeding the virus elsewhere. ""Seeding should not be a concern as infections are already present outside London,"" it said. It was agreed the biggest impact would be ""closing schools, colleges and universities; stopping leisure activities, including bars, restaurants and theatres; closing places of work"".Schools in England and Wales shut on March 20.",Newspaper
551,551,"Traffic lights, hand-shaking and complacency: the advice","May 6, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),1045,1045,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Rhys Blakely,"Traffic lights, hand-shaking and complacency: the advice","After calls for greater transparency the government published more of the guidance from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) that has informed its response to the pandemic : grading activities by risk By April 1, two months after Britain's first confirmed cases of Covid-19, the experts could see evidence that the outbreak was waning. ""We are aware that modelling colleagues estimate that the changes already in place have probably reduced R to below 1,"" a subcommittee of behavioural scientists known as SPI-B, which feeds into Sage, said. That would mean that each infected person was resulting in less than one new case.The SPI-B panel still advocated rigorous restrictions, however. Measures should be considered to stop vulnerable people being employed in ""high-risk environments"", it said. A sudden resurgence of the virus would be seen as ""a serious failure of policy and trust in public health advice will be lost"".The panel backed a cautious and incremental exit from lockdown, possibly involving ""rapid pilot trials"" of looser restrictions in less-affected areas. The ""simple rules"" of lockdown would have to be replaced by more complicated messaging, it said. Day-to-day activities could be graded according to risk, following the ""traffic light"" system used to promote healthy foods. It suggested a public education campaign in which activities were graded as ""high-risk (avoid), medium (do rarely and carefully) and low (do freely)"".johnson shakes off advice On March 3 SPI-B had cautioned against close physical contact. ""Government should advise against greetings such as shaking hands and hugging, given existing evidence about the importance of hand hygiene,"" the panel said. On the same day Boris Johnson told a No 10 press conference that he was still shaking hands. ""People obviously can make up their own minds but I think the scientific evidence is, our judgment is, that washing your hands is the crucial thing,"" he said. He shook hands on a visit to Kettering General Hospital, Northamptonshire, on February 28, above.fears of public complacency On March 12 Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, spoke to Sky News about the potential advantages of people becoming infected and immune. By March 23 - when lockdown was imposed - he was wrestling with how to impress on the public just how dangerous Covid-19 had proven to be. ""A substantial number of people still do not feel sufficiently personally threatened,"" SPI-B said. ""The perceived level of personal threat needs to be increased among those who are complacent, using hard-hitting emotional messaging."" Earlier government messaging had been a mistake. ""There seems to be insufficient understanding of, or feelings of responsibility about, people's role in transmitting the infection to others. This may have resulted in part from messaging around the low level of risk to most people and talk of the desirability of building 'herd immunity.'"" There was criticism of advice given to vulnerable people to self-isolate. ""The guidance is vague,"" the scientists said.""The phrase 'aim to' is too weak - the guidance should promote action not aims."" People had been told to wipe down surfaces but official advice had not told them to use disinfectant.dark forecasts for the nhs On March 20 the SPI-M-O committee, which includes specialists on flu epidemics, said: ""It is very likely we will see ICU capacity in London breached by the end of the month, even if additional measures are put in place today."" The rest of the country was one to two weeks behind. ""In the absence of additional measures being put into place in the next few days, it is likely that we will breach ICU capacity in other regions.""This was in a report to Sage, not to ministers. Earlier in March the scientists estimated that 12 per cent of people ill enough to be admitted to hospital with Covid-19 would die. The latest data shows a proportion of 33 per cent.doubts on immunity passports On April 13 SPI-B voiced concerns over the idea, floated by Matt Hancock, the health secretary, on April 1, that ""immunity passports"" could be used to allow some people to leave lockdown. Tests would have to be 98 per cent accurate to be approved by the regulator. Even then, large numbers of people would be given inaccurate results. The panel also warned that the system could lead to a black market in fake test results. ""If a test result is a requirement for a resumption of work, strategies to 'game' the system may arise,"" it said. ""These include people deliberately seeking out infection or attempting to purchase a fake test result, commercial organisations selling unapproved tests, or approved tests becoming available through private organisations at prices that make them unavailable to most.""It also warned that ""some employers may discriminate on the basis of antibody status"".the schools dilemma On March 2 the scientific advisers said that the epidemic seen in Wuhan was ""inconsistent with no transmission from/to children"". Specialists on respiratory diseases advised that ""school closures are likely to impact transmission [of Covid], although significantly less than with flu"".On March 4, however, SPI-B voiced concern over a potential public backlash. ""School closures will be highly disruptive and likely to present an unequal burden to different sections of society,"" the panel said. It pointed to Japan, where it said the policy was giving rise to growing discontent. On March 14, the closure of schools and ""social distancing of over-65s"" were listed as only two measures with ""high confidence"" of limiting transmission of Covid-19. Three days later SPI-B said that it had ""not found a robust academic evidence base relating to the acceptability or social impact of dismissal v closure"".By March 17 and 18 Sage was grappling with locking down the capital. Concerns had been raised that restrictions there would cause people to flee, seeding the virus elsewhere. ""Seeding should not be a concern as infections are already present outside London,"" it said. It was agreed the biggest impact would be ""closing schools, colleges and universities; stopping leisure activities, including bars, restaurants and theatres; closing places of work"".Schools in England and Wales shut on March 20.",Newspaper
552,552,"Traffic lights, hand-shaking and complacency: the advice","May 6, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),1148,1148,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Rhys Blakely,"Traffic lights, hand-shaking and complacency: the advice","After calls for greater transparency the government published more of the guidance from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) that has informed its response to the pandemic.grading activities by risk By April 1, two months after Britain's first confirmed cases of Covid-19, the experts could see evidence that the outbreak was waning. ""We are aware that modelling colleagues estimate that the changes already in place have probably reduced R to below 1,"" a subcommittee of behavioural scientists known as SPI-B, which feeds into Sage, said. That would mean that each infected person was resulting in less than one new case.The SPI-B panel still advocated rigorous restrictions, however. Measures should be considered to stop vulnerable people being employed in ""high-risk environments"", it said. A sudden resurgence of the virus would be seen as ""a serious failure of policy and trust in public health advice will be lost"".The panel backed a cautious and incremental exit from lockdown, possibly involving ""rapid pilot trials"" of looser restrictions in less-affected areas. The ""simple rules"" of lockdown would have to be replaced by more complicated messaging, it said. Day-to-day activities could be graded according to risk, following the ""traffic light"" system used to promote healthy foods. It suggested a public education campaign in which activities were graded as ""high-risk (avoid), medium (do rarely and carefully) and low (do freely)"".johnson shakes off advice On March 3 SPI-B had cautioned against close physical contact. ""Government should advise against greetings such as shaking hands and hugging, given existing evidence about the importance of hand hygiene,"" the panel said. On the same day Boris Johnson told a No 10 press conference that he was still shaking hands. ""People obviously can make up their own minds but I think the scientific evidence is, our judgment is, that washing your hands is the crucial thing,"" he said.fears of public complacency On March 12 Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, spoke to Sky News about the potential advantages of people becoming infected and immune. By March 23 - when lockdown was imposed - he was wrestling with how to impress on the public just how dangerous Covid-19 had proven to be. ""A substantial number of people still do not feel sufficiently personally threatened,"" SPI-B said. ""The perceived level of personal threat needs to be increased among those who are complacent, using hard-hitting emotional messaging."" Earlier government messaging had been a mistake. ""There seems to be insufficient understanding of, or feelings of responsibility about, people's role in transmitting the infection to others. This may have resulted in part from messaging around the low level of risk to most people and talk of the desirability of building 'herd immunity' ."" There was criticism of advice given to vulnerable people to self-isolate. ""The guidance is vague,"" the scientists said. ""The phrase 'aim to' is too weak - the guidance should promote action not aims."" People had been told to wipe down surfaces but official advice had not told them to use disinfectant.dark forecasts for the nhs On March 20 the SPI-M-O committee, which includes specialists on flu epidemics, said: ""It is very likely we will see ICU capacity in London breached by the end of the month, even if additional measures are put in place today."" The rest of the country was one to two weeks behind. ""In the absence of additional measures being put into place in the next few days, it is likely that we will breach ICU capacity in other regions.""This was in a report to Sage, not to ministers. Earlier in March the scientists estimated that 12 per cent of people ill enough to be admitted to hospital with Covid-19 would die. The latest data shows a proportion of 33 per cent.doubts on immunity passports On April 13 SPI-B voiced concerns over the idea, floated by Matt Hancock, the health secretary, on April 1, that ""immunity passports"" could be used to allow some people to leave lockdown. Tests would have to be 98 per cent accurate to be approved by the regulator. Even then, large numbers of people would be given inaccurate results. The panel also warned that the system could lead to a black market in fake test results. ""If a test result is a requirement for a resumption of work, strategies to 'game' the system may arise,"" it said. ""These include people deliberately seeking out infection or attempting to purchase a fake test result, commercial organisations selling unapproved tests, or approved tests becoming available through private organisations at prices that make them unavailable to most.""It also warned that ""some employers may discriminate on the basis of antibody status"".fairness The scientists often observed that the poorest and most vulnerable suffer the worst effects of lockdown and disease. They warn of frustration if policies are seen as unfair - if, for instance, particular religious or ethnic groups are prevented from meeting or if sporting events take place behind closed doors but are available on TV to subscribers.They also recognise that Britain is being compared with other countries and a memo dated March 12 suggested frustration at the pace of ministers. ""SPI-B has pointed out repeatedly that trust will be lost in sections of the public if measures witnessed in other countries are not adopted in the UK and that not pursuing such routes needs to be well explained.""the schools dilemma On March 2 the scientific advisers said that the epidemic seen in Wuhan was ""inconsistent with no transmission from/to children"". Specialists on respiratory diseases advised that ""school closures are likely to impact transmission [of Covid], although significantly less than with flu"".On March 4, however, SPI-B voiced concern over a potential public backlash. ""School closures will be highly disruptive and likely to present an unequal burden to different sections of society,"" the panel said. It pointed to Japan, where it said the policy was giving rise to growing discontent. On March 14, the closure of schools and ""social distancing of over-65s"" were listed as only two measures with ""high confidence"" of limiting transmission of Covid-19. Three days later SPI-B said that it had ""not found a robust academic evidence base relating to the acceptability or social impact of dismissal v closure"".By March 17 and 18 Sage was grappling with locking down the capital. Concerns had been raised that restrictions there would cause people to flee, seeding the virus elsewhere. ""Seeding should not be a concern as infections are already present outside London,"" it said. It was agreed the biggest impact would be ""closing schools, colleges and universities; stopping leisure activities, including bars, restaurants and theatres; closing places of work"".Schools in England and Wales shut on March 20.",Newspaper
558,558,Analysis Just how much ministers' [...],"May 6, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),241,241,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Analysis Just how much ministers' [...],"Analysis Just how much ministers' response to the coronavirus has been driven by judgments on how the public would react is clear from the Sage documents published yesterday (Chris Smyth writes).Wariness at school closures seems to have been encouraged by reports of discontent at similar policies elsewhere. Even what now seems like a relatively mild policy of quarantine of those with symptoms seems to have been delayed by fears over its unequal social impact.The documents also reveal how the ""stay at home"" message was honed by fears that some people were complacent about the virus. Emotional messaging, stressing a direct personal threat, and appeals to social duty were suggested.This has worked so well that it limits ministers' freedom. Explaining more nuanced measures will be tricky, behavioural scientists concluded after the lockdown began.Those looking for evidence that ministers ignored scientists' warnings will be largely disappointed.Reluctance to lock down earlier can be explained by a conclusion on March 2 that such a policy would probably not reduce the ultimate number of infections. Sage had dramatically underestimated the speed of the spread.The only clear example of scientists suggesting faster action than the government took is a warning on March 20 that even immediate action would not stop London's intensive care units being overwhelmed. The prime minister waited three more days before taking nationwide action.",Newspaper
559,559,Analysis Just how much ministers' [...],"May 6, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),241,241,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Chris Smyth,Analysis Just how much ministers' [...],"Analysis Just how much ministers' response to the coronavirus has been driven by judgments on how the public would react is clear from the Sage documents published yesterday (Chris Smyth writes).Wariness at school closures seems to have been encouraged by reports of discontent at similar policies elsewhere. Even what now seems like a relatively mild policy of quarantine of those with symptoms seems to have been delayed by fears over its unequal social impact.The documents also reveal how the ""stay at home"" message was honed by fears that some people were complacent about the virus. Emotional messaging, stressing a direct personal threat, and appeals to social duty were suggested.This has worked so well that it limits ministers' freedom. Explaining more nuanced measures will be tricky, behavioural scientists concluded after the lockdown began.Those looking for evidence that ministers ignored scientists' warnings will be largely disappointed.Reluctance to lock down earlier can be explained by a conclusion on March 2 that such a policy would probably not reduce the ultimate number of infections. Sage had dramatically underestimated the speed of the spread.The only clear example of scientists suggesting faster action than the government took is a warning on March 20 that even immediate action would not stop London's intensive care units being overwhelmed. The prime minister waited three more days before taking nationwide action.",Newspaper
560,560,Analysis Just how much ministers' [...],"May 6, 2020 Wednesday",International,The Times (London),241,241,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,Analysis Just how much ministers' [...],"Analysis Just how much ministers' response to the coronavirus has been driven by judgments on how the public would react is clear from the Sage documents published yesterday (Chris Smyth writes).Wariness at school closures seems to have been encouraged by reports of discontent at similar policies elsewhere. Even what now seems like a relatively mild policy of quarantine of those with symptoms seems to have been delayed by fears over its unequal social impact.The documents also reveal how the ""stay at home"" message was honed by fears that some people were complacent about the virus. Emotional messaging, stressing a direct personal threat, and appeals to social duty were suggested.This has worked so well that it limits ministers' freedom. Explaining more nuanced measures will be tricky, behavioural scientists concluded after the lockdown began.Those looking for evidence that ministers ignored scientists' warnings will be largely disappointed.Reluctance to lock down earlier can be explained by a conclusion on March 2 that such a policy would probably not reduce the ultimate number of infections. Sage had dramatically underestimated the speed of the spread.The only clear example of scientists suggesting faster action than the government took is a warning on March 20 that even immediate action would not stop London's intensive care units being overwhelmed. The prime minister waited three more days before taking nationwide action.",Newspaper
571,571,"That's the way the money goes ... the lesson for lockdown;Financial education has an important role to play to prepare children for an uncertain future and there are plenty of free resources to get the message across, writes Lucy Warwick-Ching","May 9, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2238,2238,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Lucy Warwick-Ching,"That's the way the money goes ... the lesson for lockdownFinancial education has an important role to play to prepare children for an uncertain future and there are plenty of free resources to get the message across, writes Lucy Warwick-Ching","Along with identifying different plants in the garden, calculating fractions and learning who Boudicca was, this week I've also been trying to teach my children about the value of money. Like millions of working parents, my husband and I became temporary teachers when lockdown began on March 23 as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.What has saved us are the abundance of online learning programmes from the likes of BBC Bitesize, The Khan Academy and the new government-funded National Oak Academy, which streams 180 lessons a week. And, of course, there are YouTube lessons from celebrities, such as PE with Joe Wicks, maths with Carol Vorderman or history with Dan Snow. Yet it is not just traditional subjects that are taught digitally - there is a wealth of material on personal finance too for children of all ages.Experts say the lockdown is the perfect opportunity to give young people the financial skills they need for life. ""Most previous generations - including millennials and Generation Xers - were not taught about basic financial concepts, having to learn the hard way once they started working,"" says Adrian Lowcock, head of personal investing at Willis Owen. ""This could be our chance to change that. While none of us would choose to be stuck in our houses for an indefinite period, we have an opportunity now to ensure something positive comes out of this crisis. Teaching our kids new things - including the value of money - could be a real benefit to them.""Whether you're looking to introduce formal lessons under lockdown, shake up your children's savings or integrate learning about money more subtly into everyday family life, here is a wealth of ideas to inspire parents.Start giving pocket money Whether it is 50p or £5 a week, giving pocket money helps children learn about budgeting and spending decisions.""It doesn't matter how much you give your children, the act of paying regular pocket money helps open up conversations around money in the home,"" says Louise Hill, co-founder of GoHenry, one of a growing number of specialist contactless card apps for children and parents.Competitors include Rooster Money, Osper, Gimi and Otly. While fees and features vary, all of them help parents to educate children about the value of money while controlling what they're spending. The key, says Ms Hill, is to get children thinking about the four key pillars of money management: spend, save, earn, and give.Make them work for itAs well as giving them weeklypocket money, parents can pay theirchildrento complete tasks and chores- either via one of the above apps, orthe old-fashioned way in cash.The number one chore parentsreward via the Rooster Money app isTidying bedrooms - and the mostpopular ways children spend their""earnings"" are online computergames such as Roblox or Fortnite.parents. may have mixed feelingsabout monetising chores, but this canhelp youngsters learn where moneycomes from, that it has to be earned,and does not necessarily come easily.Sarah Coles, personal finance anal - lyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, saychildren of any age can do chores forcash. ""There are more of you makingthe place a mess at the moment, somore of you can clean up, and the kids"" can get some experience of earningmoney,"" she says.David Boyes from Wiltshire signed up his eight-year-old daughter Ciarafor the GoHenry app and has beenpaying her to do chores. He says:""Within weeks, Ciara has learnt thevalue of money. Before, she would askfor things with no concept of whatthey cost. Now that she is managingher own money, Ciara has becomevery conscious of what is going in andout of her account.""""  For smaller children, having a mable jar to fill - with the promise oftreats when it is full - works well as asimple rewards system. Good behaviour can earn marbles - bad behaviour will result in the threat of marbles being removed!Get them involved in household budgeting Building a budget encourages chil""en - and adults - to take a close look at their spending habits. This could be introduced from an early age via (an online) trip to the supermarket. Perhaps you could give them a set amount of money to see what they can buy on a budget. Older children could be challenged to make a meal - good practice for when they leave home, get a job or go to university.""It's very likely that we're all going to be working and learning from home for a considerable time yet,"" says Maike Currie, director at Fidelity International. ""Take this opportunity to teach your children about money. You don't need any textbooks - your kitchen (and lounge) is the best classroom.""""During lockdown, people may be paying closer attention to family budgets and avoiding unnecessary spending,"" says Becky O'Connor, personal finance specialist at Royal London. ""This is a good chance to apply maths to real life.""You could challenge children to find a better deal on mobile phone and broadband contracts, electricity suppliers or insurance and make them your in-house savings expert. To encourage them to do the research to find a deal, consider sharing some of the savings with them.Dig out their old savings accounts While stuck indoors, searching for paperwork and passwords for longforgotten children's savings accounts could be profitable. The first wave of Child Trust Funds will mature later this year, with about 400,000 teenagers becoming eligible to claim funds totalling around £700m.CTFs were set up predominantly to invest in stocks and shares, so children will be able to see how investments have performed over time - a great opportunity to get them interested in the stock market. You could also encourage them to transfer the money into an adult stocks and shares Isa.If you set up a Junior Isa for your child, be aware that the annual taxfree savings limit has just been raised to a very generous £9,000.For cash savings, challenge children to find out the rate of interest paid on old accounts, then research the best deals available.Play games Board games are an easy way to get children interested in money. You could try Monopoly - there are important financial lessons here, such as the importance of always keeping an emergency fund, managing cash flow and honing your negotiating skills. It naturally brings out lots of discussion (and arguments) over money and being the banker is great for mental arithmetic.Older children and young adults could try the FT's Road to Riches game, where they will be faced with dilemmas, including prioritising saving for a house deposit or a pension.The power of saving Saving for a long-term target helps teach children that resisting the temptation to spend immediately can lead to bigger rewards.""For older children, you could promise to pay a 'bonus' if they hit an agreed savings target. Or you could offer to double any money they put aside into savings,"" says Ms Coles. ""This will show them the benefits of saving towards their goals.""This could also give you an opportunity to explain how long-term savings vehicles such as Junior Isas work, and how the investments within them can help generate more money in the long run.Watch and learn The internet provides fun - and free - ways to teach your children about money.The KickStart Money programme is proving popular with parents and was set up after research found that our money habits as adults are set by the age of seven. Aimed at improving financial education among five to 11-year-olds, using videos, games and quizzes, the initiative is funded by 20 financial companies and overseen by charity MyBnk.Its financial education programme, Family Money Twist, is an easy way to encourage the youngest members of the household to learn to save and spend responsibly - with help from the Cookie Monster and a Saveo-saurus Rex. Its programme for 7-11 year olds is set to launch next week.Steve Korris, father of seven-yearold Matilda, has used Family Money Twist to introduce money to her and to start conversations about money at home. ""At school she has learnt coin recognition and maths sums, but nothing about how money works, value, income and savings,"" he says. ""She's very inquisitive so will definitely be asking questions now we've got her started.""Another free resource for teachers (adapted for home schooling) is the website of the Young Money charity. Parents can download free home learning guides covering everything from spending and budgeting to how student loans work.Children aged 4-19 can sign up for the Young Money Challenge and win £50 for themselves (and up to £500 for their school). This year's theme is how to be a responsible consumer.Delayed gratification One vital habit to develop and practice is finding ways to delay spending decisions. Many things that children (and adults) want badly in the moment seem less crucial if they just delay the purchase.""Telling kids that they can have that thing they want, but only if they still want it in a day or a week, is a technique that resolves a lot of impulse spending,"" says Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk.The time it takes to save for something is a powerful indicator of its value for children who are old enough to receive pocket money. Tell them to divide the cost of the thing they want by the amount of their weekly allowance to work out how many weeks it will take them to save for it.""The thought of, say, eight weeks of waiting gives context to £40 - and might just put them off the item,"" says Ms O'Connor. However, be prepared for more enterprising children to ask for a pocket money pay raise.Another way of connecting time and the value of money is to divide large items up into the number of days you and your partner have had to work to afford them.""This way, they learn to equate the worth of possessions according to effort and to view things they want as reward for work,"" says Ms O'Connor.""If you explain to your child that it takes three days of work to earn, say, one PS4, they are able to understand the value of the item. Do this with houses and cars - calculating after tax for greater effect - and watch their mouths open in disbelief.""Set an example ""Never underestimate the impact your own money habits - good or bad - will have on your children,"" says Ms Currie. ""Describe what debt is, and the downward spiral that it can be.""You can talk to your children about your own experiences and interest rates associated with different financial products. This will be particularly beneficial to those who might be about to take on student loans.""If you teach them nothing else, make sure they have a firm understanding of the two Cs: compound interest and credit cards,"" she adds. ""If they understand the magical power of the former and the dangers of the latter, you're halfway there.""Talk about money In the current environment you may want to have some financial discussions in private, but in general, it's great to show children that money is not taboo by talking about it openly at home.However you try to teach children about the value of money the key thing is not to make it boring, says Ms Coles. ""You can do more harm than good if you march them through a preset lesson under time pressure and with you both in a state of high stress.""If you have time to teach your kids about money, this is a brilliant opportunity to do so, but if you don't have time or space for it, then the handsoff methods may make a great deal more sense.""Money matters Financial education will have an important role to play in preparing children for an uncertain future, says the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), warning that young people stand to be the group that is most economically affected by the fallout of the pandemic.A lack of preparedness for the unexpected has shown that money lessons matter, says Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk.""Levels of financial resilience in the UK are extremely low, with large portions of the population with little or no savings buffer to tide them through unexpected emergencies,"" he explains.He points out that a large proportion of the UK population lack the functional skills and knowledge to manage their money.""Since we're now in the midst of such an emergency, the importance of financial resilience and financial capability is becoming painfully apparent.""However, building financial capability takes time, and requires developing effective money management habits. ""The earlier such behaviours can be inculcated, the better,"" Mr Davies adds.Even though many young people say they wish they had learned more about money and finance at school, it has never risen far up the agenda.Myron Jobson, personal finance campaigner at Interactive Investor, says: ""In a packed curriculum, financial education competes for space with many other topics and it is not compulsory in academies, private schools or faith schools. But with many families now taking a much more hands-on role in home learning, there's more flexibility to talk about money management.""Top 10 things children spend pocket money on during lockdown 1. Roblox 2. Fortnite 3. Books & magazines 4. Lego 5. Sweet & chocolates 6. Xbox 7. Minecraft 8. Toys 9. Apps 10. PlayStation Source: Rooster Money Top 10 chores children are doing to earn money during lockdown 1. Clean bedroom 2. Make the bed 3. Do the laundry 4. Clear the table 5. Look after pets 6. Set the table 7. Empty dishwasher 8. Homework 9. Load the dishwasher 10. Take out the bins",Newspaper
572,572,"That's the way the money goes ... the lesson for lockdown;Financial education has an important role to play to prepare children for an uncertain future and there are plenty of free resources to get the message across, writes Lucy Warwick-Ching","May 9, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2238,2238,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Lucy Warwick-Ching,"That's the way the money goes ... the lesson for lockdownFinancial education has an important role to play to prepare children for an uncertain future and there are plenty of free resources to get the message across, writes Lucy Warwick-Ching","Along with identifying different plants in the garden, calculating fractions and learning who Boudicca was, this week I've also been trying to teach my children about the value of money. Like millions of working parents, my husband and I became temporary teachers when lockdown began on March 23 as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.What has saved us are the abundance of online learning programmes from the likes of BBC Bitesize, The Khan Academy and the new government-funded National Oak Academy, which streams 180 lessons a week. And, of course, there are YouTube lessons from celebrities, such as PE with Joe Wicks, maths with Carol Vorderman or history with Dan Snow. Yet it is not just traditional subjects that are taught digitally - there is a wealth of material on personal finance too for children of all ages.Experts say the lockdown is the perfect opportunity to give young people the financial skills they need for life. ""Most previous generations - including millennials and Generation Xers - were not taught about basic financial concepts, having to learn the hard way once they started working,"" says Adrian Lowcock, head of personal investing at Willis Owen. ""This could be our chance to change that. While none of us would choose to be stuck in our houses for an indefinite period, we have an opportunity now to ensure something positive comes out of this crisis. Teaching our kids new things - including the value of money - could be a real benefit to them.""Whether you're looking to introduce formal lessons under lockdown, shake up your children's savings or integrate learning about money more subtly into everyday family life, here is a wealth of ideas to inspire parents.Start giving pocket money Whether it is 50p or £5 a week, giving pocket money helps children learn about budgeting and spending decisions.""It doesn't matter how much you give your children, the act of paying regular pocket money helps open up conversations around money in the home,"" says Louise Hill, co-founder of GoHenry, one of a growing number of specialist contactless card apps for children and parents.Competitors include Rooster Money, Osper, Gimi and Otly. While fees and features vary, all of them help parents to educate children about the value of money while controlling what they're spending. The key, says Ms Hill, is to get children thinking about the four key pillars of money management: spend, save, earn, and give.Make them work for itAs well as giving them weeklypocket money, parents can pay theirchildrento complete tasks and chores- either via one of the above apps, orthe old-fashioned way in cash.The number one chore parentsreward via the Rooster Money app isTidying bedrooms - and the mostpopular ways children spend their""earnings"" are online computergames such as Roblox or Fortnite.parents. may have mixed feelingsabout monetising chores, but this canhelp youngsters learn where moneycomes from, that it has to be earned,and does not necessarily come easily.Sarah Coles, personal finance anal - lyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, saychildren of any age can do chores forcash. ""There are more of you makingthe place a mess at the moment, somore of you can clean up, and the kids"" can get some experience of earningmoney,"" she says.David Boyes from Wiltshire signed up his eight-year-old daughter Ciarafor the GoHenry app and has beenpaying her to do chores. He says:""Within weeks, Ciara has learnt thevalue of money. Before, she would askfor things with no concept of whatthey cost. Now that she is managingher own money, Ciara has becomevery conscious of what is going in andout of her account.""""  For smaller children, having a mable jar to fill - with the promise oftreats when it is full - works well as asimple rewards system. Good behaviour can earn marbles - bad behaviour will result in the threat of marbles being removed!Get them involved in household budgeting Building a budget encourages chil""en - and adults - to take a close look at their spending habits. This could be introduced from an early age via (an online) trip to the supermarket. Perhaps you could give them a set amount of money to see what they can buy on a budget. Older children could be challenged to make a meal - good practice for when they leave home, get a job or go to university.""It's very likely that we're all going to be working and learning from home for a considerable time yet,"" says Maike Currie, director at Fidelity International. ""Take this opportunity to teach your children about money. You don't need any textbooks - your kitchen (and lounge) is the best classroom.""""During lockdown, people may be paying closer attention to family budgets and avoiding unnecessary spending,"" says Becky O'Connor, personal finance specialist at Royal London. ""This is a good chance to apply maths to real life.""You could challenge children to find a better deal on mobile phone and broadband contracts, electricity suppliers or insurance and make them your in-house savings expert. To encourage them to do the research to find a deal, consider sharing some of the savings with them.Dig out their old savings accounts While stuck indoors, searching for paperwork and passwords for longforgotten children's savings accounts could be profitable. The first wave of Child Trust Funds will mature later this year, with about 400,000 teenagers becoming eligible to claim funds totalling around £700m.CTFs were set up predominantly to invest in stocks and shares, so children will be able to see how investments have performed over time - a great opportunity to get them interested in the stock market. You could also encourage them to transfer the money into an adult stocks and shares Isa.If you set up a Junior Isa for your child, be aware that the annual taxfree savings limit has just been raised to a very generous £9,000.For cash savings, challenge children to find out the rate of interest paid on old accounts, then research the best deals available.Play games Board games are an easy way to get children interested in money. You could try Monopoly - there are important financial lessons here, such as the importance of always keeping an emergency fund, managing cash flow and honing your negotiating skills. It naturally brings out lots of discussion (and arguments) over money and being the banker is great for mental arithmetic.Older children and young adults could try the FT's Road to Riches game, where they will be faced with dilemmas, including prioritising saving for a house deposit or a pension.The power of saving Saving for a long-term target helps teach children that resisting the temptation to spend immediately can lead to bigger rewards.""For older children, you could promise to pay a 'bonus' if they hit an agreed savings target. Or you could offer to double any money they put aside into savings,"" says Ms Coles. ""This will show them the benefits of saving towards their goals.""This could also give you an opportunity to explain how long-term savings vehicles such as Junior Isas work, and how the investments within them can help generate more money in the long run.Watch and learn The internet provides fun - and free - ways to teach your children about money.The KickStart Money programme is proving popular with parents and was set up after research found that our money habits as adults are set by the age of seven. Aimed at improving financial education among five to 11-year-olds, using videos, games and quizzes, the initiative is funded by 20 financial companies and overseen by charity MyBnk.Its financial education programme, Family Money Twist, is an easy way to encourage the youngest members of the household to learn to save and spend responsibly - with help from the Cookie Monster and a Saveo-saurus Rex. Its programme for 7-11 year olds is set to launch next week.Steve Korris, father of seven-yearold Matilda, has used Family Money Twist to introduce money to her and to start conversations about money at home. ""At school she has learnt coin recognition and maths sums, but nothing about how money works, value, income and savings,"" he says. ""She's very inquisitive so will definitely be asking questions now we've got her started.""Another free resource for teachers (adapted for home schooling) is the website of the Young Money charity. Parents can download free home learning guides covering everything from spending and budgeting to how student loans work.Children aged 4-19 can sign up for the Young Money Challenge and win £50 for themselves (and up to £500 for their school). This year's theme is how to be a responsible consumer.Delayed gratification One vital habit to develop and practice is finding ways to delay spending decisions. Many things that children (and adults) want badly in the moment seem less crucial if they just delay the purchase.""Telling kids that they can have that thing they want, but only if they still want it in a day or a week, is a technique that resolves a lot of impulse spending,"" says Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk.The time it takes to save for something is a powerful indicator of its value for children who are old enough to receive pocket money. Tell them to divide the cost of the thing they want by the amount of their weekly allowance to work out how many weeks it will take them to save for it.""The thought of, say, eight weeks of waiting gives context to £40 - and might just put them off the item,"" says Ms O'Connor. However, be prepared for more enterprising children to ask for a pocket money pay raise.Another way of connecting time and the value of money is to divide large items up into the number of days you and your partner have had to work to afford them.""This way, they learn to equate the worth of possessions according to effort and to view things they want as reward for work,"" says Ms O'Connor.""If you explain to your child that it takes three days of work to earn, say, one PS4, they are able to understand the value of the item. Do this with houses and cars - calculating after tax for greater effect - and watch their mouths open in disbelief.""Set an example ""Never underestimate the impact your own money habits - good or bad - will have on your children,"" says Ms Currie. ""Describe what debt is, and the downward spiral that it can be.""You can talk to your children about your own experiences and interest rates associated with different financial products. This will be particularly beneficial to those who might be about to take on student loans.""If you teach them nothing else, make sure they have a firm understanding of the two Cs: compound interest and credit cards,"" she adds. ""If they understand the magical power of the former and the dangers of the latter, you're halfway there.""Talk about money In the current environment you may want to have some financial discussions in private, but in general, it's great to show children that money is not taboo by talking about it openly at home.However you try to teach children about the value of money the key thing is not to make it boring, says Ms Coles. ""You can do more harm than good if you march them through a preset lesson under time pressure and with you both in a state of high stress.""If you have time to teach your kids about money, this is a brilliant opportunity to do so, but if you don't have time or space for it, then the handsoff methods may make a great deal more sense.""Money matters Financial education will have an important role to play in preparing children for an uncertain future, says the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), warning that young people stand to be the group that is most economically affected by the fallout of the pandemic.A lack of preparedness for the unexpected has shown that money lessons matter, says Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk.""Levels of financial resilience in the UK are extremely low, with large portions of the population with little or no savings buffer to tide them through unexpected emergencies,"" he explains.He points out that a large proportion of the UK population lack the functional skills and knowledge to manage their money.""Since we're now in the midst of such an emergency, the importance of financial resilience and financial capability is becoming painfully apparent.""However, building financial capability takes time, and requires developing effective money management habits. ""The earlier such behaviours can be inculcated, the better,"" Mr Davies adds.Even though many young people say they wish they had learned more about money and finance at school, it has never risen far up the agenda.Myron Jobson, personal finance campaigner at Interactive Investor, says: ""In a packed curriculum, financial education competes for space with many other topics and it is not compulsory in academies, private schools or faith schools. But with many families now taking a much more hands-on role in home learning, there's more flexibility to talk about money management.""Top 10 things children spend pocket money on during lockdown 1. Roblox 2. Fortnite 3. Books & magazines 4. Lego 5. Sweet & chocolates 6. Xbox 7. Minecraft 8. Toys 9. Apps 10. PlayStation Source: Rooster Money Top 10 chores children are doing to earn money during lockdown 1. Clean bedroom 2. Make the bed 3. Do the laundry 4. Clear the table 5. Look after pets 6. Set the table 7. Empty dishwasher 8. Homework 9. Load the dishwasher 10. Take out the bins",Newspaper
573,573,"That's the way the money goes ... the lesson for lockdown;Financial education has an important role to play to prepare children for an uncertain future and there are plenty of free resources to get the message across, writes Lucy Warwick-Ching","May 9, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2238,2238,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Lucy Warwick-Ching,"That's the way the money goes ... the lesson for lockdownFinancial education has an important role to play to prepare children for an uncertain future and there are plenty of free resources to get the message across, writes Lucy Warwick-Ching","Along with identifying different plants in the garden, calculating fractions and learning who Boudicca was, this week I've also been trying to teach my children about the value of money. Like millions of working parents, my husband and I became temporary teachers when lockdown began on March 23 as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.What has saved us are the abundance of online learning programmes from the likes of BBC Bitesize, The Khan Academy and the new government-funded National Oak Academy, which streams 180 lessons a week. And, of course, there are YouTube lessons from celebrities, such as PE with Joe Wicks, maths with Carol Vorderman or history with Dan Snow. Yet it is not just traditional subjects that are taught digitally - there is a wealth of material on personal finance too for children of all ages.Experts say the lockdown is the perfect opportunity to give young people the financial skills they need for life. ""Most previous generations - including millennials and Generation Xers - were not taught about basic financial concepts, having to learn the hard way once they started working,"" says Adrian Lowcock, head of personal investing at Willis Owen. ""This could be our chance to change that. While none of us would choose to be stuck in our houses for an indefinite period, we have an opportunity now to ensure something positive comes out of this crisis. Teaching our kids new things - including the value of money - could be a real benefit to them.""Whether you're looking to introduce formal lessons under lockdown, shake up your children's savings or integrate learning about money more subtly into everyday family life, here is a wealth of ideas to inspire parents.Start giving pocket money Whether it is 50p or £5 a week, giving pocket money helps children learn about budgeting and spending decisions.""It doesn't matter how much you give your children, the act of paying regular pocket money helps open up conversations around money in the home,"" says Louise Hill, co-founder of GoHenry, one of a growing number of specialist contactless card apps for children and parents.Competitors include Rooster Money, Osper, Gimi and Otly. While fees and features vary, all of them help parents to educate children about the value of money while controlling what they're spending. The key, says Ms Hill, is to get children thinking about the four key pillars of money management: spend, save, earn, and give.Make them work for itAs well as giving them weeklypocket money, parents can pay theirchildrento complete tasks and chores- either via one of the above apps, orthe old-fashioned way in cash.The number one chore parentsreward via the Rooster Money app isTidying bedrooms - and the mostpopular ways children spend their""earnings"" are online computergames such as Roblox or Fortnite.parents. may have mixed feelingsabout monetising chores, but this canhelp youngsters learn where moneycomes from, that it has to be earned,and does not necessarily come easily.Sarah Coles, personal finance anal - lyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, saychildren of any age can do chores forcash. ""There are more of you makingthe place a mess at the moment, somore of you can clean up, and the kids"" can get some experience of earningmoney,"" she says.David Boyes from Wiltshire signed up his eight-year-old daughter Ciarafor the GoHenry app and has beenpaying her to do chores. He says:""Within weeks, Ciara has learnt thevalue of money. Before, she would askfor things with no concept of whatthey cost. Now that she is managingher own money, Ciara has becomevery conscious of what is going in andout of her account.""""  For smaller children, having a mable jar to fill - with the promise oftreats when it is full - works well as asimple rewards system. Good behaviour can earn marbles - bad behaviour will result in the threat of marbles being removed!Get them involved in household budgeting Building a budget encourages chil""en - and adults - to take a close look at their spending habits. This could be introduced from an early age via (an online) trip to the supermarket. Perhaps you could give them a set amount of money to see what they can buy on a budget. Older children could be challenged to make a meal - good practice for when they leave home, get a job or go to university.""It's very likely that we're all going to be working and learning from home for a considerable time yet,"" says Maike Currie, director at Fidelity International. ""Take this opportunity to teach your children about money. You don't need any textbooks - your kitchen (and lounge) is the best classroom.""""During lockdown, people may be paying closer attention to family budgets and avoiding unnecessary spending,"" says Becky O'Connor, personal finance specialist at Royal London. ""This is a good chance to apply maths to real life.""You could challenge children to find a better deal on mobile phone and broadband contracts, electricity suppliers or insurance and make them your in-house savings expert. To encourage them to do the research to find a deal, consider sharing some of the savings with them.Dig out their old savings accounts While stuck indoors, searching for paperwork and passwords for longforgotten children's savings accounts could be profitable. The first wave of Child Trust Funds will mature later this year, with about 400,000 teenagers becoming eligible to claim funds totalling around £700m.CTFs were set up predominantly to invest in stocks and shares, so children will be able to see how investments have performed over time - a great opportunity to get them interested in the stock market. You could also encourage them to transfer the money into an adult stocks and shares Isa.If you set up a Junior Isa for your child, be aware that the annual taxfree savings limit has just been raised to a very generous £9,000.For cash savings, challenge children to find out the rate of interest paid on old accounts, then research the best deals available.Play games Board games are an easy way to get children interested in money. You could try Monopoly - there are important financial lessons here, such as the importance of always keeping an emergency fund, managing cash flow and honing your negotiating skills. It naturally brings out lots of discussion (and arguments) over money and being the banker is great for mental arithmetic.Older children and young adults could try the FT's Road to Riches game, where they will be faced with dilemmas, including prioritising saving for a house deposit or a pension.The power of saving Saving for a long-term target helps teach children that resisting the temptation to spend immediately can lead to bigger rewards.""For older children, you could promise to pay a 'bonus' if they hit an agreed savings target. Or you could offer to double any money they put aside into savings,"" says Ms Coles. ""This will show them the benefits of saving towards their goals.""This could also give you an opportunity to explain how long-term savings vehicles such as Junior Isas work, and how the investments within them can help generate more money in the long run.Watch and learn The internet provides fun - and free - ways to teach your children about money.The KickStart Money programme is proving popular with parents and was set up after research found that our money habits as adults are set by the age of seven. Aimed at improving financial education among five to 11-year-olds, using videos, games and quizzes, the initiative is funded by 20 financial companies and overseen by charity MyBnk.Its financial education programme, Family Money Twist, is an easy way to encourage the youngest members of the household to learn to save and spend responsibly - with help from the Cookie Monster and a Saveo-saurus Rex. Its programme for 7-11 year olds is set to launch next week.Steve Korris, father of seven-yearold Matilda, has used Family Money Twist to introduce money to her and to start conversations about money at home. ""At school she has learnt coin recognition and maths sums, but nothing about how money works, value, income and savings,"" he says. ""She's very inquisitive so will definitely be asking questions now we've got her started.""Another free resource for teachers (adapted for home schooling) is the website of the Young Money charity. Parents can download free home learning guides covering everything from spending and budgeting to how student loans work.Children aged 4-19 can sign up for the Young Money Challenge and win £50 for themselves (and up to £500 for their school). This year's theme is how to be a responsible consumer.Delayed gratification One vital habit to develop and practice is finding ways to delay spending decisions. Many things that children (and adults) want badly in the moment seem less crucial if they just delay the purchase.""Telling kids that they can have that thing they want, but only if they still want it in a day or a week, is a technique that resolves a lot of impulse spending,"" says Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk.The time it takes to save for something is a powerful indicator of its value for children who are old enough to receive pocket money. Tell them to divide the cost of the thing they want by the amount of their weekly allowance to work out how many weeks it will take them to save for it.""The thought of, say, eight weeks of waiting gives context to £40 - and might just put them off the item,"" says Ms O'Connor. However, be prepared for more enterprising children to ask for a pocket money pay raise.Another way of connecting time and the value of money is to divide large items up into the number of days you and your partner have had to work to afford them.""This way, they learn to equate the worth of possessions according to effort and to view things they want as reward for work,"" says Ms O'Connor.""If you explain to your child that it takes three days of work to earn, say, one PS4, they are able to understand the value of the item. Do this with houses and cars - calculating after tax for greater effect - and watch their mouths open in disbelief.""Set an example ""Never underestimate the impact your own money habits - good or bad - will have on your children,"" says Ms Currie. ""Describe what debt is, and the downward spiral that it can be.""You can talk to your children about your own experiences and interest rates associated with different financial products. This will be particularly beneficial to those who might be about to take on student loans.""If you teach them nothing else, make sure they have a firm understanding of the two Cs: compound interest and credit cards,"" she adds. ""If they understand the magical power of the former and the dangers of the latter, you're halfway there.""Talk about money In the current environment you may want to have some financial discussions in private, but in general, it's great to show children that money is not taboo by talking about it openly at home.However you try to teach children about the value of money the key thing is not to make it boring, says Ms Coles. ""You can do more harm than good if you march them through a preset lesson under time pressure and with you both in a state of high stress.""If you have time to teach your kids about money, this is a brilliant opportunity to do so, but if you don't have time or space for it, then the handsoff methods may make a great deal more sense.""Money matters Financial education will have an important role to play in preparing children for an uncertain future, says the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), warning that young people stand to be the group that is most economically affected by the fallout of the pandemic.A lack of preparedness for the unexpected has shown that money lessons matter, says Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk.""Levels of financial resilience in the UK are extremely low, with large portions of the population with little or no savings buffer to tide them through unexpected emergencies,"" he explains.He points out that a large proportion of the UK population lack the functional skills and knowledge to manage their money.""Since we're now in the midst of such an emergency, the importance of financial resilience and financial capability is becoming painfully apparent.""However, building financial capability takes time, and requires developing effective money management habits. ""The earlier such behaviours can be inculcated, the better,"" Mr Davies adds.Even though many young people say they wish they had learned more about money and finance at school, it has never risen far up the agenda.Myron Jobson, personal finance campaigner at Interactive Investor, says: ""In a packed curriculum, financial education competes for space with many other topics and it is not compulsory in academies, private schools or faith schools. But with many families now taking a much more hands-on role in home learning, there's more flexibility to talk about money management.""Top 10 things children spend pocket money on during lockdown 1. Roblox 2. Fortnite 3. Books & magazines 4. Lego 5. Sweet & chocolates 6. Xbox 7. Minecraft 8. Toys 9. Apps 10. PlayStation Source: Rooster Money Top 10 chores children are doing to earn money during lockdown 1. Clean bedroom 2. Make the bed 3. Do the laundry 4. Clear the table 5. Look after pets 6. Set the table 7. Empty dishwasher 8. Homework 9. Load the dishwasher 10. Take out the bins",Newspaper
579,579,"Against the odds;Humans have long had a complicated relationship with risk, says Gillian Tett. So how will governments and individuals weigh the difficult daily decisions facing us when we leave lockdown? ; Against the odds","May 9, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2535,2535,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Gillian Tett,"Against the oddsHumans have long had a complicated relationship with risk, says Gillian Tett. So how will governments and individuals weigh the difficult daily decisions facing us when we leave lockdown? ; Against the odds","L ast month, Dayna Polehanki, a Michigan state senator, posted a tweet from the capitol building in Lansing that might have seemed unimaginable only recently.""Directly above me, men with rifles yelling at us,"" it read, next to a picture of armed protesters standing in the building, demanding an end to the Covid-19 lockdown in the name of ""freedom"". ""Some of my colleagues who own bulletproof vests are wearing them."" It might be tempting to see this as just another sign of American political polarisation. But that would be a profound mistake. Over this bizarre and frightening scene hang questions that will affect us all in the coming months, be that in Lansing, London, Lagos or Lisbon: how do we define and measure risk? Who gets to do that? And who deals with the implications? After all, as Covid-19 subsides, public officials around the world will have to decide when it is ""safe"" to restart life.Millions of individuals will have to make their own judgments too, based on data about health, age and external risks: is it safe to go to the shops? See a friend? Board a plane? These will be tough decisions, given that the disease has already produced an estimated global death toll of quarter of a million and is so infectious that most affected countries have struggled to reduce the transmission rate (or R) below 1 (whereby on average the number of new infections caused by each sufferer is less than one, so that the disease dies away).Most of us like to think that such decisions will be driven by medical science. Some might also acknowledge economic trade-offs, as we measure the cost of epidemics against the equally severe price of recession. (Or, as one Wall Street luminary pithily notes, the challenge of finding a balance between being ""compassionate"" and ""pragmatic"".) And the decisions will undoubtedly be presented with reams of supposedly neutral data, risk models and forecasts.But statistics only capture part of the tale. I have spent much of my career writing about finance, and during the 2008 financial crisis I saw at first hand how deceptive our trust in models can be. Societies are not like a Newtonian physics equation, where people act with the predictability of gravity; humans have psychological biases, cultural assumptions and inconsistent incentives. When these are ignored - as they often have been by financiers - they can derail forecasts and risk analyses. Culture matters.So too for medicine. Health data can project when we might ""flatten the curve"" of an epidemic, to cite the catchphrase of 2020. Medical science can reveal death rates and frame mortality risks. But models cannot tell us when and how we might feel safe. As social scientists Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky pointed out in their seminal 1983 book Risk and Culture, ""The perception of risk is a social process.""Nor can those models answer the most crucial questions of all: should our risk decisions be made by individuals? By leaders? Or the community? And if the last of these, where do our community boundaries now lie? Covid-19, in other words, raises often ignored issues of trust and power and will force us to confront them - sometimes even at the point of a gun.Epidemics have long plagued humanity. But western attitudes to riskmanagement have undergone a stealthy revolution in recent centuries. Until the Renaissance in Europe, as the economic historian Peter Bernstein notes in his book Against the Gods, it was generally assumed that our fate sat in the lap of deities. And while prayer might influence the future, disasters - such as the Black Death - seemed unfathomably hard to predict.But in the 16th century, European intellectuals such as Gerolamo Cardano and Pierre de Fermat used numbering systems originally formulated by Arab cultures to develop advanced maths - and, most crucially, theories of probability. These were honed in subsequent centuries, and turbocharged after the second world war thanks to computing power, creating the modern risk-management industry. The advent of Big Data has now elevated this even further.""The ability to define what may happen in the future and to choose among alternatives lies at the heart of contemporary societies,"" writes Bernstein, who posits this as the key element dividing modern and premodern societies. ""Risk Continued on page 2 Continued from page 1 management guides us over a vast range of decision-making, from allocating wealth to safeguarding public health, from waging war to planning a family, from paying insurance premiums to wearing a seatbelt, from planting corn to marketing cornflakes.""Today, these probability-based forecasting tools are so ubiquitous - particularly in fields such as finance - that they feel completely ""natural"", if not inevitable, to westerners. Thus we often forget how unusual this approach to risk is in the sweep of human history. We also tend to overlook the fact that our minds have not ""caught up"" with those models in terms of how we evaluate risk. For one thing, humans do not always perceive the passage of time as consistently as a computer. Psychology experiments show that we vastly overemphasise short-term rewards and risks compared with long-term ones (creating a phenomenon that behavioural economists call ""hyperbolic discounting""). Similarly, we attach more weight to risks that appear directly in our line of vision. In a city such as New York, where I live, there is obsessive media coverage of the Covid-19 crisis, which has killed some 65,000 people so far in America. But previously there was little focus on seasonal flu (which killed 34,000 in the US in the 2018-19 season, according to the CDC); nor on traffic accidents, diabetes or smoking, which respectively kill around 36,000, 84,000 and 480,000 each year.""Societies and organisations are defined not so much by what risks they identify and manage, but by what they decide - whether willingly or reluctantly - to ignore,"" says Anette Mikes, a riskmanagement expert at Saïd Business School. ""Human beings are very good at using their senses to detect threats in their immediate environment,"" echoes Hugh Gusterson, an anthropologist who has studied the US nuclear industry. ""Humans are not so good at being aware of more abstract threats, even though they are often far more serious.""Another distorting factor is our social boundaries. We often - and wrongly - define ""danger"" as something outside our social group, and downplay internal threats. When Donald Trump described Covid-19 as the ""Chinese virus"", he was following a well-worn historical path of resorting to xenophobia in a time of disease. Or as Kristin Hedges and Michael Ennis-McMillan, two medical anthropologists, note in a recent paper: ""The human tendency to divide society into 'us' and 'others' when fear strikes becomes especially prevalent during infectious disease epidemics.""Structures of power and trust also matter. Back in 2008, we learnt that while financial models appeared to be based on universal principles of maths, they were created and used in different ways by different ""tribes"" of financiers.Similarly, our sense of risk in an epidemic is shaped by the question of who we think has the responsibility for handling it. Mikes, for example, identifies four overlapping patterns in how different social groups handle risk. Sometimes it is considered the responsibility of individuals to manage risk (under the principle of caveat emptor). On other occasions there is a more egalitarian approach: everyone in a community voluntarily tries to protect everyone else. A third framework uses hierarchical controls: leaders manage risk by issuing orders. Then there is a fourth option: fatalism, when nobody tries to manage risks at all.In peaceful times, we do not often define which of these four approaches we rely on to keep us safe; or not unless we work in jobs explicitly focused on measuring or trading risk, such as finance (where the concept of caveat emptor often collides with hierarchical rules). But Covid-19 crystallises this. Some of us may want to handle the dangers of an epidemic in an individualistic way, like those Lansing protesters. Others, such as the governor of Michigan, Gretchen Whitmer, who imposed the lockdown, think that hierarchical controls are needed. Nearly all of us probably have an egalitarian instinct too: we want to avoid infecting ourselves and each other. But few citizens - let alone politicians - want to stipulate explicitly how anyone should prioritise these approaches. Nor do many want to resort to the fourth option: fatalism.So where does that leave governments and citizens? In a state of confusing flux, it seems, in most countries. Take America. Its founding mythology is built on the principle of individual freedom and an ideal of the individualistic management of risk. Many citizens still embrace that: this week, for example, social media has buzzed with the tale of a hairdresser in Texas who is being sent to prison for keeping her salon open amid the enforced lockdown.But this is a rarity: most individuals recognise that pandemics are a group threat. So, in most states, there has been a sliding towards a form of hierarchical risk management in recent weeks, with lockdowns, travel bans and other controls. Moreover, members of the White House Covid-19 advisory task force have been surprised - and delighted - by the high levels of compliance.What is even more striking is the rise of egalitarian riskmanagement in the US. Consider masks. These have long been used by the populations of many usan countries, such as Japan and China, to prevent infected people from spreading disease or creating risks for others. That reflects their collectivist traditions (and experience of the Sars epidemic of the early 2000s).Until a couple of weeks ago, masks were almost never used in this way in New York. Now, however, it has become mandatory in crowded spaces. And what is notable is that there is rising social pressure to use masks, even in places where they are not mandatory. ""Dear Jogger, Bicycle douchebag, Yuppie/Millennial, Narcissist Swine,"" declared a sign this week in Brooklyn. ""Put on your fucking mask! Please respect your community and the lives of others. You do not live alone!"" There is also peer pressure to observe social distancing: self-styled citizen activists have used drones to monitor spaces, posting pictures of crowds on Florida beaches with disapproving comments. Stories are circulating on social media about citizens in New York or Florida reporting their neighbours to the police for ""crimes"" such as secretly employing hairdressers at home.Moreover, the US is not the only place where egalitarian risk controls are spreading. In the Czech Republic, the wearing of masks was not previously a feature of everyday life. But, notes Gusterson, ""almost all Czechs now wear face masks amid the coronavirus crisis because of an extraordinary grassroots movement that has incited mass homemanufacture of masks that are left on trees for anyone to take.""The movement, whose slogan is 'my mask protects you; your mask protects me', has, in just a few weeks, made those who do not wear masks appear selfish and antisocial."" Sweden, by contrast, previously had a stronger tradition of egalitarian risk management: even without hierarchical controls or a lockdown, people have been practising voluntary social distancing. So too in Singapore.In Britain the pattern is almost as confused - and conflicted - as in the US.When the crisis first hit in March, the government embraced the fourth model of risk control, namely fatalism, with prime minister Boris Johnson famously declaring that ""many more families are going to lose loved ones"".But then Britain abruptly adopted hierarchical risk controls, and introduced rules that are in most respects tougher than those in New York, say.Some London friends of mine have also embraced tight individualistic risk controls, taking measures that are unseen in New York, such as ""quarantining"" delivery packages before introducing them into the house. However, British citizens have not embraced the idea of using face masks to prevent infected people from spreading disease.This might yet shift again. When a society switches into crisis mode, notes Mikes, it ""tends to bring to the surface irreconcilable conflicts between values that in normal circumstances are invisible"". So too in an exit, if not more so. ""In many ways, lockdown is intellectually easy ... as a remedy it is clear-cut. The exit strategy is much less clear.""In one scenario that might play out in the coming months, a climate of fear creates more desire for hierarchical risk management; governments would be expected to manage health risks to an increasing degree. But it is also possible to imagine a rebellion in a place such as America, whereby the burden of risk is handed back to the individual. Or a sense of fatalism might emerge, if the economic price of pandemic control spirals too high. There are precedents: Americans are wearily used to the idea that 40,000 die each year from guns, and many accept this as the price of freedom.Technology further muddies the issue. In China, tech companies have already developed a phone app that can be used to track whether someone has had Covid-19, or not, with the results displayed like a traffic light. This is used for hierarchical risk-management control: the government will permit travel, say, if the app is green. Some Silicon Valley whizz-kids are seeking to copy this (even though it is unclear whether people who have had Covid-19 have immunity). The British government is producing another twist on this idea: a tracking and tracing app.This might yet reinforce hierarchical controls in the west, as in China. But a ""traffic light"" app could - in theory - also be used to help individuals manage their own risk (by checking on the health of others) or to promote egalitarian protections (by telling individuals when they need to isolate and/or monitoring the health of a group).Apps might also open our eyes to other risks we currently ignore, such as ""normal"" flu. They could redefine our social boundaries. After all, the Covid-19 crisis has already forced us to define who is ""inside"" or ""outside"", be that at a household, communal, ethnic or national level. If we create apps to track the health of these groups, those boundaries will be further entrenched.Where might this lead? My own best guess is that in countries such as the US and UK, we are heading towards a future with more emphasis on egalitarian risk control but within social boundaries; keeping our ""tribe"" safe will be the new mantra. But the key point to note is this: ""The word 'risk' hails from the early Italian risicare, which means 'to dare',"" as Bernstein said. ""In this sense, risk is a choice rather than a fate."" Moreover, how we make that choice defines ""what it means to be human"". Let us hope we can make those choices wisely.Gillian Tett is chair of the FT's US editorial boardMillions will have to make their own judgments: is it safe to go to the shops? See a friend? Board a plane?'Lockdown is intellectually easy ... as a remedy it is clear-cut. The exit strategy is much less clear'",Newspaper
580,580,"Against the odds;Humans have long had a complicated relationship with risk, says Gillian Tett. So how will governments and individuals weigh the difficult daily decisions facing us when we leave lockdown? ; Against the odds","May 9, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2535,2535,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Gillian Tett,"Against the oddsHumans have long had a complicated relationship with risk, says Gillian Tett. So how will governments and individuals weigh the difficult daily decisions facing us when we leave lockdown? ; Against the odds","L ast month, Dayna Polehanki, a Michigan state senator, posted a tweet from the capitol building in Lansing that might have seemed unimaginable only recently.""Directly above me, men with rifles yelling at us,"" it read, next to a picture of armed protesters standing in the building, demanding an end to the Covid-19 lockdown in the name of ""freedom"". ""Some of my colleagues who own bulletproof vests are wearing them."" It might be tempting to see this as just another sign of American political polarisation. But that would be a profound mistake. Over this bizarre and frightening scene hang questions that will affect us all in the coming months, be that in Lansing, London, Lagos or Lisbon: how do we define and measure risk? Who gets to do that? And who deals with the implications? After all, as Covid-19 subsides, public officials around the world will have to decide when it is ""safe"" to restart life.Millions of individuals will have to make their own judgments too, based on data about health, age and external risks: is it safe to go to the shops? See a friend? Board a plane? These will be tough decisions, given that the disease has already produced an estimated global death toll of quarter of a million and is so infectious that most affected countries have struggled to reduce the transmission rate (or R) below 1 (whereby on average the number of new infections caused by each sufferer is less than one, so that the disease dies away).Most of us like to think that such decisions will be driven by medical science. Some might also acknowledge economic trade-offs, as we measure the cost of epidemics against the equally severe price of recession. (Or, as one Wall Street luminary pithily notes, the challenge of finding a balance between being ""compassionate"" and ""pragmatic"".) And the decisions will undoubtedly be presented with reams of supposedly neutral data, risk models and forecasts.But statistics only capture part of the tale. I have spent much of my career writing about finance, and during the 2008 financial crisis I saw at first hand how deceptive our trust in models can be. Societies are not like a Newtonian physics equation, where people act with the predictability of gravity; humans have psychological biases, cultural assumptions and inconsistent incentives. When these are ignored - as they often have been by financiers - they can derail forecasts and risk analyses. Culture matters.So too for medicine. Health data can project when we might ""flatten the curve"" of an epidemic, to cite the catchphrase of 2020. Medical science can reveal death rates and frame mortality risks. But models cannot tell us when and how we might feel safe. As social scientists Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky pointed out in their seminal 1983 book Risk and Culture, ""The perception of risk is a social process.""Nor can those models answer the most crucial questions of all: should our risk decisions be made by individuals? By leaders? Or the community? And if the last of these, where do our community boundaries now lie? Covid-19, in other words, raises often ignored issues of trust and power and will force us to confront them - sometimes even at the point of a gun.Epidemics have long plagued humanity. But western attitudes to riskmanagement have undergone a stealthy revolution in recent centuries. Until the Renaissance in Europe, as the economic historian Peter Bernstein notes in his book Against the Gods, it was generally assumed that our fate sat in the lap of deities. And while prayer might influence the future, disasters - such as the Black Death - seemed unfathomably hard to predict.But in the 16th century, European intellectuals such as Gerolamo Cardano and Pierre de Fermat used numbering systems originally formulated by Arab cultures to develop advanced maths - and, most crucially, theories of probability. These were honed in subsequent centuries, and turbocharged after the second world war thanks to computing power, creating the modern risk-management industry. The advent of Big Data has now elevated this even further.""The ability to define what may happen in the future and to choose among alternatives lies at the heart of contemporary societies,"" writes Bernstein, who posits this as the key element dividing modern and premodern societies. ""Risk Continued on page 2 Continued from page 1 management guides us over a vast range of decision-making, from allocating wealth to safeguarding public health, from waging war to planning a family, from paying insurance premiums to wearing a seatbelt, from planting corn to marketing cornflakes.""Today, these probability-based forecasting tools are so ubiquitous - particularly in fields such as finance - that they feel completely ""natural"", if not inevitable, to westerners. Thus we often forget how unusual this approach to risk is in the sweep of human history. We also tend to overlook the fact that our minds have not ""caught up"" with those models in terms of how we evaluate risk. For one thing, humans do not always perceive the passage of time as consistently as a computer. Psychology experiments show that we vastly overemphasise short-term rewards and risks compared with long-term ones (creating a phenomenon that behavioural economists call ""hyperbolic discounting""). Similarly, we attach more weight to risks that appear directly in our line of vision. In a city such as New York, where I live, there is obsessive media coverage of the Covid-19 crisis, which has killed some 65,000 people so far in America. But previously there was little focus on seasonal flu (which killed 34,000 in the US in the 2018-19 season, according to the CDC); nor on traffic accidents, diabetes or smoking, which respectively kill around 36,000, 84,000 and 480,000 each year.""Societies and organisations are defined not so much by what risks they identify and manage, but by what they decide - whether willingly or reluctantly - to ignore,"" says Anette Mikes, a riskmanagement expert at Saïd Business School. ""Human beings are very good at using their senses to detect threats in their immediate environment,"" echoes Hugh Gusterson, an anthropologist who has studied the US nuclear industry. ""Humans are not so good at being aware of more abstract threats, even though they are often far more serious.""Another distorting factor is our social boundaries. We often - and wrongly - define ""danger"" as something outside our social group, and downplay internal threats. When Donald Trump described Covid-19 as the ""Chinese virus"", he was following a well-worn historical path of resorting to xenophobia in a time of disease. Or as Kristin Hedges and Michael Ennis-McMillan, two medical anthropologists, note in a recent paper: ""The human tendency to divide society into 'us' and 'others' when fear strikes becomes especially prevalent during infectious disease epidemics.""Structures of power and trust also matter. Back in 2008, we learnt that while financial models appeared to be based on universal principles of maths, they were created and used in different ways by different ""tribes"" of financiers.Similarly, our sense of risk in an epidemic is shaped by the question of who we think has the responsibility for handling it. Mikes, for example, identifies four overlapping patterns in how different social groups handle risk. Sometimes it is considered the responsibility of individuals to manage risk (under the principle of caveat emptor). On other occasions there is a more egalitarian approach: everyone in a community voluntarily tries to protect everyone else. A third framework uses hierarchical controls: leaders manage risk by issuing orders. Then there is a fourth option: fatalism, when nobody tries to manage risks at all.In peaceful times, we do not often define which of these four approaches we rely on to keep us safe; or not unless we work in jobs explicitly focused on measuring or trading risk, such as finance (where the concept of caveat emptor often collides with hierarchical rules). But Covid-19 crystallises this. Some of us may want to handle the dangers of an epidemic in an individualistic way, like those Lansing protesters. Others, such as the governor of Michigan, Gretchen Whitmer, who imposed the lockdown, think that hierarchical controls are needed. Nearly all of us probably have an egalitarian instinct too: we want to avoid infecting ourselves and each other. But few citizens - let alone politicians - want to stipulate explicitly how anyone should prioritise these approaches. Nor do many want to resort to the fourth option: fatalism.So where does that leave governments and citizens? In a state of confusing flux, it seems, in most countries. Take America. Its founding mythology is built on the principle of individual freedom and an ideal of the individualistic management of risk. Many citizens still embrace that: this week, for example, social media has buzzed with the tale of a hairdresser in Texas who is being sent to prison for keeping her salon open amid the enforced lockdown.But this is a rarity: most individuals recognise that pandemics are a group threat. So, in most states, there has been a sliding towards a form of hierarchical risk management in recent weeks, with lockdowns, travel bans and other controls. Moreover, members of the White House Covid-19 advisory task force have been surprised - and delighted - by the high levels of compliance.What is even more striking is the rise of egalitarian risk management in the US. Consider masks. These have long been used by the populations of many Asian countries, such as Japan and China, to prevent infected people from spreading disease or creating risks for others. That reflects their collectivist traditions (and experience of the Sars epidemic of the early 2000s).Until a couple of weeks ago, masks were almost never used in this way in New York. Now, however, it has become mandatory in crowded spaces. And what is notable is that there is rising social pressure to use masks, even in places where they are not mandatory. ""Dear Jogger, Bicycle douchebag, Yuppie/Millennial, Narcissist Swine,"" declared a sign this week in Brooklyn. ""Put on your fucking mask! Please respect your community and the lives of others. You do not live alone!"" There is also peer pressure to observe social distancing: self-styled citizen activists have used drones to monitor spaces, posting pictures of crowds on Florida beaches with disapproving comments. Stories are circulating on social media about citizens in New York or Florida reporting their neighbours to the police for ""crimes"" such as secretly employing hairdressers at home.Moreover, the US is not the only place where egalitarian risk controls are spreading. In the Czech Republic, the wearing of masks was not previously a feature of everyday life. But, notes Gusterson, ""almost all Czechs now wear face masks amid the coronavirus crisis because of an extraordinary grassroots movement that has incited mass homemanufacture of masks that are left on trees for anyone to take.""The movement, whose slogan is 'my mask protects you; your mask protects me', has, in just a few weeks, made those who do not wear masks appear selfish and antisocial."" Sweden, by contrast, previously had a stronger tradition of egalitarian risk management: even without hierarchical controls or a lockdown, people have been practising voluntary social distancing. So too in Singapore.In Britain the pattern is almost as confused - and conflicted - as in the US.When the crisis first hit in March, the government embraced the fourth model of risk control, namely fatalism, with prime minister Boris Johnson famously declaring that ""many more families are going to lose loved ones"".But then Britain abruptly adopted hierarchical risk controls, and introduced rules that are in most respects tougher than those in New York, say.Some London friends of mine have also embraced tight individualistic risk controls, taking measures that are unseen in New York, such as ""quarantining"" delivery packages before introducing them into the house. However, British citizens have not embraced the idea of using face masks to prevent infected people from spreading disease.This might yet shift again. When a society switches into crisis mode, notes Mikes, it ""tends to bring to the surface irreconcilable conflicts between values that in normal circumstances are invisible"". So too in an exit, if not more so. ""In many ways, lockdown is intellectually easy ... as a remedy it is clear-cut. The exit strategy is much less clear.""In one scenario that might play out in the coming months, a climate of fear creates more desire for hierarchical risk management; governments would be expected to manage health risks to an increasing degree. But it is also possible to imagine a rebellion in a place such as America, whereby the burden of risk is handed back to the individual. Or a sense of fatalism might emerge, if the economic price of pandemic control spirals too high. There are precedents: Americans are wearily used to the idea that 40,000 die each year from guns, and many accept this as the price of freedom.Technology further muddies the issue. In China, tech companies have already developed a phone app that can be used to track whether someone has had Covid-19, or not, with the results displayed like a traffic light. This is used for hierarchical risk-management control: the government will permit travel, say, if the app is green. Some Silicon Valley whizz-kids are seeking to copy this (even though it is unclear whether people who have had Covid-19 have immunity). The British government is producing another twist on this idea: a tracking and tracing app.This might yet reinforce hierarchical controls in the west, as in China. But a ""traffic light"" app could - in theory - also be used to help individuals manage their own risk (by checking on the health of others) or to promote egalitarian protections (by telling individuals when they need to isolate and/or monitoring the health of a group).Apps might also open our eyes to other risks we currently ignore, such as ""normal"" flu. They could redefine our social boundaries. After all, the Covid-19 crisis has already forced us to define who is ""inside"" or ""outside"", be that at a household, communal, ethnic or national level. If we create apps to track the health of these groups, those boundaries will be further entrenched.Where might this lead? My own best guess is that in countries such as the US and UK, we are heading towards a future with more emphasis on egalitarian risk control but within social boundaries; keeping our ""tribe"" safe will be the new mantra. But the key point to note is this: ""The word 'risk' hails from the early Italian risicare, which means 'to dare',"" as Bernstein said. ""In this sense, risk is a choice rather than a fate."" Moreover, how we make that choice defines ""what it means to be human"". Let us hope we can make those choices wisely.Gillian Tett is chair of the FT's US editorial boardMillions will have to make their own judgments: is it safe to go to the shops? See a friend? Board a plane?'Lockdown is intellectually easy ... as a remedy it is clear-cut. The exit strategy is much less clear'",Newspaper
581,581,"Against the odds;Humans have long had a complicated relationship with risk, says Gillian Tett. So how will governments and individuals weigh the difficult daily decisions facing us when we leave lockdown? ; Against the odds","May 9, 2020 Saturday",International,"Financial Times (London, England)",2535,2535,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Gillian Tett,"Against the oddsHumans have long had a complicated relationship with risk, says Gillian Tett. So how will governments and individuals weigh the difficult daily decisions facing us when we leave lockdown? ; Against the odds","L ast month, Dayna Polehanki, a Michigan state senator, posted a tweet from the capitol building in Lansing that might have seemed unimaginable only recently.""Directly above me, men with rifles yelling at us,"" it read, next to a picture of armed protesters standing in the building, demanding an end to the Covid-19 lockdown in the name of ""freedom"". ""Some of my colleagues who own bulletproof vests are wearing them."" It might be tempting to see this as just another sign of American political polarisation. But that would be a profound mistake. Over this bizarre and frightening scene hang questions that will affect us all in the coming months, be that in Lansing, London, Lagos or Lisbon: how do we define and measure risk? Who gets to do that? And who deals with the implications? After all, as Covid-19 subsides, public officials around the world will have to decide when it is ""safe"" to restart life.Millions of individuals will have to make their own judgments too, based on data about health, age and external risks: is it safe to go to the shops? See a friend? Board a plane? These will be tough decisions, given that the disease has already produced an estimated global death toll of quarter of a million and is so infectious that most affected countries have struggled to reduce the transmission rate (or R) below 1 (whereby on average the number of new infections caused by each sufferer is less than one, so that the disease dies away).Most of us like to think that such decisions will be driven by medical science. Some might also acknowledge economic trade-offs, as we measure the cost of epidemics against the equally severe price of recession. (Or, as one Wall Street luminary pithily notes, the challenge of finding a balance between being ""compassionate"" and ""pragmatic"".) And the decisions will undoubtedly be presented with reams of supposedly neutral data, risk models and forecasts.But statistics only capture part of the tale. I have spent much of my career writing about finance, and during the 2008 financial crisis I saw at first hand how deceptive our trust in models can be. Societies are not like a Newtonian physics equation, where people act with the predictability of gravity; humans have psychological biases, cultural assumptions and inconsistent incentives. When these are ignored - as they often have been by financiers - they can derail forecasts and risk analyses. Culture matters.So too for medicine. Health data can project when we might ""flatten the curve"" of an epidemic, to cite the catchphrase of 2020. Medical science can reveal death rates and frame mortality risks. But models cannot tell us when and how we might feel safe. As social scientists Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky pointed out in their seminal 1983 book Risk and Culture, ""The perception of risk is a social process.""Nor can those models answer the most crucial questions of all: should our risk decisions be made by individuals? By leaders? Or the community? And if the last of these, where do our community boundaries now lie? Covid-19, in other words, raises often ignored issues of trust and power and will force us to confront them - sometimes even at the point of a gun.Epidemics have long plagued humanity. But western attitudes to riskmanagement have undergone a stealthy revolution in recent centuries. Until the Renaissance in Europe, as the economic historian Peter Bernstein notes in his book Against the Gods, it was generally assumed that our fate sat in the lap of deities. And while prayer might influence the future, disasters - such as the Black Death - seemed unfathomably hard to predict.But in the 16th century, European intellectuals such as Gerolamo Cardano and Pierre de Fermat used numbering systems originally formulated by Arab cultures to develop advanced maths - and, most crucially, theories of probability. These were honed in subsequent centuries, and turbocharged after the second world war thanks to computing power, creating the modern risk-management industry. The advent of Big Data has now elevated this even further.""The ability to define what may happen in the future and to choose among alternatives lies at the heart of contemporary societies,"" writes Bernstein, who posits this as the key element dividing modern and premodern societies. ""Risk Continued on page 2 Continued from page 1 management guides us over a vast range of decision-making, from allocating wealth to safeguarding public health, from waging war to planning a family, from paying insurance premiums to wearing a seatbelt, from planting corn to marketing cornflakes.""Today, these probability-based forecasting tools are so ubiquitous - particularly in fields such as finance - that they feel completely ""natural"", if not inevitable, to westerners. Thus we often forget how unusual this approach to risk is in the sweep of human history. We also tend to overlook the fact that our minds have not ""caught up"" with those models in terms of how we evaluate risk. For one thing, humans do not always perceive the passage of time as consistently as a computer. Psychology experiments show that we vastly overemphasise short-term rewards and risks compared with long-term ones (creating a phenomenon that behavioural economists call ""hyperbolic discounting""). Similarly, we attach more weight to risks that appear directly in our line of vision. In a city such as New York, where I live, there is obsessive media coverage of the Covid-19 crisis, which has killed some 65,000 people so far in America. But previously there was little focus on seasonal flu (which killed 34,000 in the US in the 2018-19 season, according to the CDC); nor on traffic accidents, diabetes or smoking, which respectively kill around 36,000, 84,000 and 480,000 each year.""Societies and organisations are defined not so much by what risks they identify and manage, but by what they decide - whether willingly or reluctantly - to ignore,"" says Anette Mikes, a riskmanagement expert at Saïd Business School. ""Human beings are very good at using their senses to detect threats in their immediate environment,"" echoes Hugh Gusterson, an anthropologist who has studied the US nuclear industry. ""Humans are not so good at being aware of more abstract threats, even though they are often far more serious.""Another distorting factor is our social boundaries. We often - and wrongly - define ""danger"" as something outside our social group, and downplay internal threats. When Donald Trump described Covid-19 as the ""Chinese virus"", he was following a well-worn historical path of resorting to xenophobia in a time of disease. Or as Kristin Hedges and Michael Ennis-McMillan, two medical anthropologists, note in a recent paper: ""The human tendency to divide society into 'us' and 'others' when fear strikes becomes especially prevalent during infectious disease epidemics.""Structures of power and trust also matter. Back in 2008, we learnt that while financial models appeared to be based on universal principles of maths, they were created and used in different ways by different ""tribes"" of financiers.Similarly, our sense of risk in an epidemic is shaped by the question of who we think has the responsibility for handling it. Mikes, for example, identifies four overlapping patterns in how different social groups handle risk. Sometimes it is considered the responsibility of individuals to manage risk (under the principle of caveat emptor). On other occasions there is a more egalitarian approach: everyone in a community voluntarily tries to protect everyone else. A third framework uses hierarchical controls: leaders manage risk by issuing orders. Then there is a fourth option: fatalism, when nobody tries to manage risks at all.In peaceful times, we do not often define which of these four approaches we rely on to keep us safe; or not unless we work in jobs explicitly focused on measuring or trading risk, such as finance (where the concept of caveat emptor often collides with hierarchical rules). But Covid-19 crystallises this. Some of us may want to handle the dangers of an epidemic in an individualistic way, like those Lansing protesters. Others, such as the governor of Michigan, Gretchen Whitmer, who imposed the lockdown, think that hierarchical controls are needed. Nearly all of us probably have an egalitarian instinct too: we want to avoid infecting ourselves and each other. But few citizens - let alone politicians - want to stipulate explicitly how anyone should prioritise these approaches. Nor do many want to resort to the fourth option: fatalism.So where does that leave governments and citizens? In a state of confusing flux, it seems, in most countries. Take America. Its founding mythology is built on the principle of individual freedom and an ideal of the individualistic management of risk. Many citizens still embrace that: this week, for example, social media has buzzed with the tale of a hairdresser in Texas who is being sent to prison for keeping her salon open amid the enforced lockdown.But this is a rarity: most individuals recognise that pandemics are a group threat. So, in most states, there has been a sliding towards a form of hierarchical risk management in recent weeks, with lockdowns, travel bans and other controls. Moreover, members of the White House Covid-19 advisory task force have been surprised - and delighted - by the high levels of compliance.What is even more striking is the rise of egalitarian riskmanagement in the US. Consider masks. These have long been used by the populations of many europen countries, such as Japan and China, to prevent infected people from spreading disease or creating risks for others. That reflects their collectivist traditions (and experience of the Sars epidemic of the early 2000s).Until a couple of weeks ago, masks were almost never used in this way in New York. Now, however, it has become mandatory in crowded spaces. And what is notable is that there is rising social pressure to use masks, even in places where they are not mandatory. ""Dear Jogger, Bicycle douchebag, Yuppie/Millennial, Narcissist Swine,"" declared a sign this week in Brooklyn. ""Put on your fucking mask! Please respect your community and the lives of others. You do not live alone!"" There is also peer pressure to observe social distancing: self-styled citizen activists have used drones to monitor spaces, posting pictures of crowds on Florida beaches with disapproving comments. Stories are circulating on social media about citizens in New York or Florida reporting their neighbours to the police for ""crimes"" such as secretly employing hairdressers at home.Moreover, the US is not the only place where egalitarian risk controls are spreading. In the Czech Republic, the wearing of masks was not previously a feature of everyday life. But, notes Gusterson, ""almost all Czechs now wear face masks amid the coronavirus crisis because of an extraordinary grassroots movement that has incited mass homemanufacture of masks that are left on trees for anyone to take.""The movement, whose slogan is 'my mask protects you; your mask protects me', has, in just a few weeks, made those who do not wear masks appear selfish and antisocial."" Sweden, by contrast, previously had a stronger tradition of egalitarian risk management: even without hierarchical controls or a lockdown, people have been practising voluntary social distancing. So too in Singapore.In Britain the pattern is almost as confused - and conflicted - as in the US.When the crisis first hit in March, the government embraced the fourth model of risk control, namely fatalism, with prime minister Boris Johnson famously declaring that ""many more families are going to lose loved ones"".But then Britain abruptly adopted hierarchical risk controls, and introduced rules that are in most respects tougher than those in New York, say.Some London friends of mine have also embraced tight individualistic risk controls, taking measures that are unseen in New York, such as ""quarantining"" delivery packages before introducing them into the house. However, British citizens have not embraced the idea of using face masks to prevent infected people from spreading disease.This might yet shift again. When a society switches into crisis mode, notes Mikes, it ""tends to bring to the surface irreconcilable conflicts between values that in normal circumstances are invisible"". So too in an exit, if not more so. ""In many ways, lockdown is intellectually easy ... as a remedy it is clear-cut. The exit strategy is much less clear.""In one scenario that might play out in the coming months, a climate of fear creates more desire for hierarchical risk management; governments would be expected to manage health risks to an increasing degree. But it is also possible to imagine a rebellion in a place such as America, whereby the burden of risk is handed back to the individual. Or a sense of fatalism might emerge, if the economic price of pandemic control spirals too high. There are precedents: Americans are wearily used to the idea that 40,000 die each year from guns, and many accept this as the price of freedom.Technology further muddies the issue. In China, tech companies have already developed a phone app that can be used to track whether someone has had Covid-19, or not, with the results displayed like a traffic light. This is used for hierarchical risk-management control: the government will permit travel, say, if the app is green. Some Silicon Valley whizz-kids are seeking to copy this (even though it is unclear whether people who have had Covid-19 have immunity). The British government is producing another twist on this idea: a tracking and tracing app.This might yet reinforce hierarchical controls in the west, as in China. But a ""traffic light"" app could - in theory - also be used to help individuals manage their own risk (by checking on the health of others) or to promote egalitarian protections (by telling individuals when they need to isolate and/or monitoring the health of a group).Apps might also open our eyes to other risks we currently ignore, such as ""normal"" flu. They could redefine our social boundaries. After all, the Covid-19 crisis has already forced us to define who is ""inside"" or ""outside"", be that at a household, communal, ethnic or national level. If we create apps to track the health of these groups, those boundaries will be further entrenched.Where might this lead? My own best guess is that in countries such as the US and UK, we are heading towards a future with more emphasis on egalitarian risk control but within social boundaries; keeping our ""tribe"" safe will be the new mantra. But the key point to note is this: ""The word 'risk' hails from the early Italian risicare, which means 'to dare',"" as Bernstein said. ""In this sense, risk is a choice rather than a fate."" Moreover, how we make that choice defines ""what it means to be human"". Let us hope we can make those choices wisely.Gillian Tett is chair of the FT's US editorial boardMillions will have to make their own judgments: is it safe to go to the shops? See a friend? Board a plane?'Lockdown is intellectually easy ... as a remedy it is clear-cut. The exit strategy is much less clear'",Newspaper
590,590,"Mission critical: make people want to spend, spend, spend;Ending the lockdown is just the first step to rebuilding consumer confidence, write John Collingridge, Jill Treanor, Sam Chambers and Sabah Meddings","May 10, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),1538,1538,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,,"Mission critical: make people want to spend, spend, spendEnding the lockdown is just the first step to rebuilding consumer confidence, write John Collingridge, Jill Treanor, Sam Chambers and Sabah Meddings","At car showrooms across the country, yellow tape markings, Perspex screens and hand sanitiser stations await customers coming in for test drives. Where once baristastaffed coffee bars and children's play areas were among the perks designed to ""sell the sizzle"" and tempt customers to make the second-biggest purchase of their lives, now hygiene has become the key feature.""There's a health crisis and there will be an economic crisis,"" said Alison Jones, UK managing director of Peugeot, Citroën and DS. ""We need to get the economy moving. Health is the main priority - but we've found a way to work safely.""The car industry is just one of many retail sectors now wrestling with a crucial question: they might be ready to reopen, but how do they flip consumers' psychological switches and persuade them to open their wallets again? The lockdown and social distancing have brought household spending - which makes up 60% of economic output - to a juddering halt. As shops, cinemas, car dealerships, pubs and restaurants pulled down the shutters, so too did consumers. Data from Visa shows household spending is down by about 30%. The housing market is on hold, with listings and sales down more than 80%, according to Zoopla. Car sales crashed 97% last month, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. Savings are rising as households squirrel away cash.Last week, the Bank of England laid bare the devastation this will wreak on the economy. The UK is braced for the worst recession in 300 years, it warned, with output crashing as much as 30% in the first half of the year and two million people set to lose their jobs. Even when the lockdown is eased, a ""degree of precautionary behaviour by households and businesses is assumed to persist"", it said.Coaxing consumers out of hibernation is one of the most vexing issues facing the economy. It will help define what shape the recovery takes: whether there is a sudden, sharp bounceback in the second half of the year, creating a V-shaped graph, or whether a self-perpetuating cycle of grim economic news results in a slow, attritional U-shaped trudge out.The starting point is bleak. The government's ""Stay at home, protect the NHS, save lives"" slogan helped prevent hospitals from becoming overwhelmed, but in the weeks of lockdown it has also sown a deep-rooted fear of normal activities.Shaking hands is an inconceivable faux pas. Shoppers instinctively give each other a wide berth in the aisles at Tesco. Footage of crowded pubs and trains from before lockdown looks alien. Persuading people that going out can be safe will require significant mental rewiring.""People adjust very quickly to new ways of life,"" said George Buckley, chief UK economist at Nomura. ""It's going to be very difficult to get people back into parts of the economy where social distancing needs to be actively used.""There will be a worry factor about going into pubs and using public transport. If you don't need to do it, why would you do it? It's going to take a long time for people to go back into restaurants and theatres - not from the supply side but from the demand side.""A recent survey by Ipsos Mori showed that more than 60% of people would be uncomfortable returning to bars and restaurants, using public transport or going to a large event. ""People [in the West] tend to overreact and overestimate the fatality and infection rates,"" said Michele Belot, a behavioural economist at the European University Institute in Italy. Its research shows Britons believe that 23% of people in their local area are, or have been, infected with Covid-19, versus 14% in South Korea. The actual rate in both countries is thought to be much lower.Professor David Spiegelhalter, a statistician at Cambridge University, told the BBC last week: ""We do need to have some sort of campaign to encourage people who are very low-risk to get out and start living again, when we are able to.""But living - and spending - will look very different. At car dealerships, customers who brave the trip will sit at least two metres away from the salesperson, possibly separated by a sheet of Perspex and wearing facemasks. Andy Barratt, managing director of Ford in Britain, said it would make any car sale ""a sanitised, mechanical process"".He added: ""You've got to work out how to get the emotion, and that may be selling the sizzle through video. You want to build rapport, trust and loyalty.""Test drives will be either done alone, guided by an app, or with the salesperson sitting in the back-left seat. Peugeot and Vauxhall dealerships will insist on a three-hour gap between test drives of each car to allow for deep cleaning.Forms will be signed electronically.Customers who do not want to enter a branch will be given virtual tours of vehicles, and cars will be delivered to their homes. ""Radical progression comes in the face of adversity,"" said Barratt. ""The dealers have digitised much more quickly. The market has to come back.""A similar story of sanitised selling is taking shape in sectors from fashion to hotels. The coronavirus has left the world awash with unsold clothes. Retailers will have to shift stockpiled spring/summerwear as quickly as possible - but with so many brands on sale, discounting will lose its power, while social distancing will result in a struggle to handle surges in demand at stores or warehouses around the time of Black Friday and Christmas.InterContinental Hotels Group, owner of Holiday Inn, plans to put cleaning kits in rooms, install screens at check-in desks and visibly sanitise communal areas.""We are going to highlight what we do and make sure there are visible cues throughout the hotel,"" said chief executive Keith Barr. ""We're going to look at the customer journey, including the future of buffets. Will they still exist?"" All that extra friction will increase the likelihood that consumers are put off buying things they do not need. That will be a big problem for all retailers of ""discretionary"" - non-urgent - goods. ""You need to re-convince people of the importance of things they've forgotten about,"" said Roger Parry, chairman of polling company YouGov. ""That third flavour of yoghurt they haven't bought in a while: it's reminding people they get pleasure from unnecessary things.""But hopes of a recovery in spending are set against a troubling backdrop. A rising tide of job losses, such as 18,000 announced at Virgin Atlantic, British Airways and Ryanair in the past fortnight, coupled with stagnant wages, is likely to further depress sentiment. Hours will be cut. Google Trends data shows searches for ""redundancy"" and ""mortgage holiday"" have spiked in recent weeks.Those who have not been furloughed or lost their jobs have become forced or willing savers. Simon French at Panmure Gordon said that during times of unemployment, precautionary savings rise. He calculates there are more than 55.5 million consumers in the UK. Of those, seven million have ""cyclical"" jobs in industries such as manufacturing, whose fortunes rise and fall with the wider economy - and are particularly sensitive to economic sentiment. ""They are the bellwether that will determine whether this is a V-shaped recovery in terms of consumer spending or much more of a U-shaped recovery,"" said French.Swathes of households face financial difficulty, especially as mortgage holidays, the furlough scheme and other payment breaks come to an end next month. Capital Economics estimates that two million mortgage holidays have been granted, while claims for universal credit have rocketed. Debt charity StepChange warned that the self-employed and sole traders, who last struggled during the financial crisis, were also at risk of being dragged into difficulty.All that will heap pressure on ministers and the Bank to do more to stimulate the economy via measures such as VAT cuts, a stamp duty holiday and quantitative easing. Car firms want a scrappage scheme and state-funded discounts to get consumers to buy new, low-emission models. Former Tesco boss Sir Terry Leahy called for regulations to be slashed to free up business investment. ""Take housing,"" Leahy said. ""If you were able to build 300,000 homes rather than 100,000, that greatly increases the supply, houses become more affordable, and those house moves make a big difference in terms of consumer spending.""If there is to be a recovery, it must be supported by clear and reassuring messages about safety from the government, said Belot. Countries such as China and South Korea have been able to lift their lockdowns in part because previous epidemics, such as Sars, meant that they already had systems to handle the crisis.""Everything has to do with reassuring people there are public safety measures in place,"" said Belot. ""What is troubling for people is that they do not really see how the year ahead will go. Uncertainty is very bad for consumption and investment. Some countries are more successful than others when it comes to reassurance about a long-term plan. When I talk to people in Asia, they are a lot less worried, because there are protocols in place to respond to possible new outbreaks.""Here, I am not really sure that people are reassured about the way the crisis has been handled.""",Newspaper
598,598,"Calls grow for release of restless twentysomethings;Those aged 20-30 are in least physical danger but their mental health and finances are suffering most, researchers say","May 10, 2020 Sunday",International,The Sunday Times (London),865,865,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,Gabriel Pogrund; Shingi Mararike; Shanti Das; Nicholas Hellen,"Calls grow for release of restless twentysomethingsThose aged 20-30 are in least physical danger but their mental health and finances are suffering most, researchers say","@REPNICKTV/@MADDIEDAVIES In a suburb of Stevenage, Hertfordshire, a young man disguised as a bush can be seen on video, shuffling down the street, using front gardens as camouflage to avoid the police. ""What's our neighbour doing?"" says the narrator. ""Reaching new extremes in how to sneak out!"" The clip, which has garnered 3.3 million views on the sharing site TikTok, taps into a welling sentiment among young people: a desire to break the lockdown. They are starting to rebel against restrictions designed to tackle a disease that has left most of them physically unscathed but is damaging their mental wellbeing and life prospects.According to a study by University College London (UCL), they are easily the least compliant age group when it comes to the lockdown: about half of those aged 18-29 admit breaking the rules. The survey of 85,000 found most middle-aged and elderly people complying.This generation gap reflects the reality of the disease: a tiny minority of youngsters who contract the coronavirus die from it. In the first week of May, 10 people in their twenties died of it, compared with 550 in their sixties.Yet the young are faring worse during the lockdown, reporting the strongest feelings of loneliness, anxiety and suicide. UCL found that almost 30% of young people have thought about death recently and that the young had lower life satisfaction than any other age group.Daisy Fancourt, who leads the research, has told Public Health England and the government about the findings: ""We have made them aware of the disproportionate impact that lockdown is having on younger people.""For people in their peak social years lockdown has instilled a collective ""Fomo"" - fear of missing out - and a sense of anxiety and loss about a time they had expected to spend on formative experiences. Added to that is the tyranny that stalks every generation of young people: boredom.As the government announces the next phase of lockdown today, it faces a question: could discontent curdle into mutiny? Andrew Oswald, a behavioural scientist at Warwick University, is among those calling for the state to head off mass non-compliance by introducing a ""staged exit"" from the lockdown in which those in their twenties are released straight away, followed by those in their thirties.""We have to think about the terrible plight of these young people,"" he said. ""[They] should be released almost immediately. It's important to understand they're almost completely safe.""He added that the disproportionate financial effect of Covid-19 on the young made the case for relaxing the rules even more urgent: ""A lot of the old are in a fairly secure position, even if we're all fed up with not being able to go to the beach, but the young ... have very largely run out of all money and their life prospects have suddenly worsened dramatically.""Young people have the lowest confidence in the government of any group. According to the study, their trust in Boris Johnson has risen under the lockdown, but less than in other age groups.Dylan Welsh, 22, a student at Strathclyde University in Glasgow, has been self-isolating in his flat for eight weeks. He reported seeing people on Instagram flouting the lockdown: ""It infuriates me, but I'm in an awkward position to be, like: are you properly social distancing?"" Sonali Gidwani, 23, a technology consultant in London, said she knew one person who had contracted Covid-19 after ""sleeping around"" during the lockdown. ""It's very frustrating,"" she said.Meanwhile, the authorities have clamped down on house parties, barbecues in parks and large gatherings. In Stockton, Co Durham, last week police secured a closure order for a flat that held a lockdown party featuring a ""constant flow of visitors by car, taxi, bicycle, moped and on foot"".On the Wirral, the council has drawn up a list of hotspots where young people are gathering illicitly. Last week it said that its detached youth team - an arm of social services - had been redeployed to round up errant teenagers and ""educate them"" on social distancing.Yesterday people flocked to London's parks and public spaces to enjoy the sunshine, with many flouting social distancing rules. Hackney Marshes was crammed with young people swimming in the River Lea. Police wrote on social media: ""We're fighting a losing battle in the parks today. Hundreds of people sitting having pizza, beers, wines.""Officers were also stopping drivers on the A23 on their way to Brighton yesterday and turning them back.Some councils and youth charities say disadvantaged youngsters are most likely to flout rules, with a lack of adult supervision or entertainment at home. They are also the least likely to have gardens.Sam Rowe, founder of the Academy of Hard Knocks, which aims to cut youth crime in east London through martial arts, said: ""A lot of them haven't got the internet or the gadgets and gizmos that rich kids have ... They say, 'I don't know what to do. I can't do this, can't do that, can't go out.' They're stuck indoors.""A lot of them are so fed up with the lockdown that they're breaking it. They're bored and frustrated.""Editorial, page 18 The bushman video has been watched 3.3 million times",Newspaper
